Okay, let's check. So you online. Can you all hear me? I think you hopefully have hopefully have the right microphone. Yes. Okay, that sounds good. Thank you very much. Now I just need to check that the pointer is working that looks good. All right. Good. Good morning, everyone. smaller crowd in the room. I've urged in the in the call. Let's get started every week with feedback, main feedback from last week was there was none. Basically, there's a total of six answers, relatively mild scores. And basically No one wrote anything particularly of exciting into the, into the feedback. Not sure why this is. Maybe the lecture was a bit boring, unimportant. Maybe you just have all had to run to the bus. I don't know. If you feel like you want to give feedback then please do. So. Also, don't forget to sign up for the exam. If you have haven't already done so, on EBS. What are we going to do today? So you're all working on your project now. So you've all looked at your data sets, you've done some inflationary analysis, maybe you've already figured some stuff out. And now you're beginning to think about how you're going to write the report. And a big part of that will be to make figures and plots that go into the report. Now, obviously, that's a bit Have a mechanic part of producing scientific output. But it's one that many people actually don't do very well. And so I've set aside one lecture today to talk about how to make a figure, how to turn your data into visual representations of what you're trying to say. And we'll talk about how you do that mechanically usual things you can probably already think of, and a few things hopefully, that you haven't seen before, that you may be interested in. So first of all, we need to talk about why we even have to talk about figures. And actually, I think it's a good idea to have at least one lecture to talk about figures in your Master's course, because you spent a significant part of your undergraduate courses, learning how proof works, right. And in mapping improves, and plots and figures are almost equally important. Now, if you are, if you've gone through at least the German academic education system, then you don't necessarily get that message you may have been taught or actually, you probably have been taught that proofs are this mathematically pure, wonderful thing that are like the mechanisms of quantitative science, at least for especially in computer science, right, which is sort of almost a mathematical science. And that formal arguments is, you know, mathematical statements are the one way to convey truth. And everything else is just the plots are a little bit, they're a bit dirty. i This is sort of thing you do, it's it's almost a bit bad, because it's like you're adding features to your to your text, because your readers are a bit dumb, and they can't read the text, right? It's like, make your play papers a little bit like children's books, if you put in a plot, right? But actually, plots are the the completion of the story that just as important as proofs, proofs provide a discrete statement, they help argue that a certain thing is true. But they don't provide a quantitative statement, they often don't show that something actually works in practice. And there are people I know, especially actually not just among students, that goes all the way up to very senior academics, who kind of dislike plots. And they will give talks that are just one proof after the other. And if you've seen these people, then you may come out of your education thinking that that's the right way to do science. It's kind of clean and pure. And everyone who does plots is a little bit practical. And I think at this point here, it's important to point out that there are people like me, for example, who don't think that's true, maybe it's just important that someone says that every now and then. In fact, if I go to talks, and someone just has one theorem after the other, and no proper plots, not even like a, like a nice sketch of why they're trying to do something in a certain way, I will judge them, I think they don't actually know what they're doing. Right? If it just thought about something like at home in their kitchen, and they've never actually done it themselves, they just think it's true, but they've never really checked. So if you think you're you're you're doing well by not doing plots, or not caring about them, also kind of treating them like a little bit silly part of the of the paper. For some people, that actually leaves a bad impression. And I'm not alone with this. So I'd like to point out that there are many people who think, in a graphical way, rather than a mathematical way. So I as you know, I collect this feedback, I used to collect it by hand, like I used to have pieces of paper on round three Corona that people would fill out, here are some of the answers that I keep getting some very old scan, actually from a talk that I gave, I don't know, almost 10 years ago, where, which I think is a good example of how people have very different views, or very different channels on how they get information out of a presentation or have a talk out of a paper out of whatever right experiment. So there's, here's someone who says the things I like most is the math. And I really dislike this fact that you did some, like concrete concrete example. Examples are stupid and and as someone that right next to it will the exact opposite. Versus I really like the examples. I like this sort of abstract is a concrete stuff. And I really hate this math part is someone who says the main thing they liked are just the plots, and others don't like these equations. So there are people who think in a visual way. I'm one of them as well. I find it really hard to pass a proof I have to stare at it forever and trying to get but I can look at the plot and immediately see problems and strengths of a method because I have a feeling for what the line has to look like. And if you think that that's kind of a weakness, let me point out that there are many people, very good scientists out there who think that way as well, or at least used to be so does anyone know who this person down here is? Yes, say it out loud. Richard Fineman also for the people in the in the call one of the most famous physicist of all time not laureate inventor of quantum field theory. And this is one of his blackboards in physics undergraduates whoops. A lot of physicist professors use his textbooks. So my pointer is just stopped working for some reason. No, no way to explain physics, and as you can see, it's actually not like, okay, there's some math on those slides. But every single equation comes with a picture with a drawing. And these are very careful drawings. Like he's clearly thought about the drawings more than about the mass. Right? These lines, they all mean something there is like very concrete, it's not just like he's really thought about it, by the mass is more like, dangerous or whatever it's gonna work up right. Here is John Wheeler, one of the inventors of the nuclear bomb. Very prominent physicist, also a Nobel Laureate. He was famous in the 70s for coming to give talks at universities. And then that was before the advent of projectors, right? He would spend an hour or two before the lecture preparing filling blackboards with colorful chalk. With the story he was about to tell. That's one of his one of his. Like boards. So this guy is actually a theorist. Right? Not an experimentalist. And he's clearly thinking entirely in terms of pictures. There isn't there's basically no equation there. Right? There's a few, but they are not particularly prominent. So if you think that's just the 70s, and things have changed, and these are just physicists, physicists, always a little bit dirty anyway. I don't know really mathematicians. This is Martin Hiva fields medalists, one of the most abstract thinkers that mankind has a life at the moment. A, I was in a talk he gave a while ago in in Warwick in the UK. And this is actually not a picture from the talk. But it could have been from his talk. That's exactly how it gives this toxic came in. He had no slides. And it just started talking and filled blackboards like this. And there wasn't a single equation. So the guy has got his Fields Medal for for rough path theory. There's a very complicated, advanced notion in the simulation of stochastic systems and dynamic systems that I will say, I have no idea about I don't understand it. But you could tell from the way that this guy spoke that everything in his head was just pictures. So you can get a Fields Medal by really thinking in your head about in geometric terms about curves that are wiggly, and how they turn and how much volume they need to fill up some parts. And not really in terms of symbols that go on a blackboard. And well, okay, so I mentioned Fineman, of course, everyone knows these. Right. So Fineman was so he, by the way, I hope everyone knows this. Now, anyone amo doesn't know what is this? Okay, so this is a Fineman graph, it's a visual representation of an equation. It's a series expansion of a bunch of events that can happen in a in a quantum field theoretic interaction between particles. That's so when a particle gets scattered by another one, there's actually an infinite sequence of ever increasingly complicated and less likely interactions that they could take. Each one of them is a term in a series expansion. And because they have a lot of structure that is very difficult to convey in equations, finally came up with these pictures that allow drawing the terms in the equation in a kind of mechanical way that is easy to expand. So this is a, an, an electron being scattered by a, I think a positron from the top, you see how bad I make actually interpreting those. But people are obviously so the reason I'm showing it this way is it is obviously a tool that someone put on their forearm, right? People are so amazed by these visual representations of science, that they decide to ink it on their body for the rest of their lives. And of course, there are also people who have the tools of equations, I think this is probably a little bit cooler. So just to complete that story, may see in 1970, and people are nodding if they know whatever this is going. It was a PhD student at Cornell, in as strong as astronomy. So synonymous the physicist that works with stars, and he studied in his PhD thesis in the late 60s must have been a fun PhD thesis and in 1968. He studied pulsars. So these are rapidly rotating stars that have extremely strong magnetic fields that you can sort of detect with a radio telescope. And they sound like extremely regular radio beeps, blips right because these are rotating stars and it rotates at a very fixed frequency. So You get like in this video signal, you get silence, another blip and another silence, another blip, and so on. And within the blip, there's a lot of structure that might be interesting because it might tell you something about the star. So he collected those with his noisy radio telescope, and then made this visualization. So this was in 1970, there was no matplotlib, there was no Python, there wasn't even proper programming languages. This is probably postscript, I would imagine. Or maybe not even that maybe he just had to hand write a piece of code for the printer, or a plotter to make this line. And think about how hard it is to make this. So these lines go in front of each other, right? So they, they overlap, right? So think for yourself, if you had to write the code for this, how much time it will take you to write it from scratch, if you have no two boxes available. It's not something you just do in 10 seconds. So this probably took him like a week of his PhD thesis, which is typical, that's for PhD students do at the end, right, you're supposed to start to write up you have three months left to write up. And you procrastinate, right, you spend a week getting one of the plots nice. But it actually made a really wonderful plot. It's amazing. Like, it conveys exactly what's going on, right? You see the regularity of this of the signal that they're perfectly overlapping that they are not drifting over time. By it's also the one one line to the next. That's an inverse of a multiple of 318 milliseconds, I guess, right? No, microseconds. And you can see that there is structure in there, but it is also there's also noise, obviously, from the measurements, it's very clear conveying the idea of the of the data. So it turns out that people really forgot about Harold craft didn't really make it far in science. But at some point, the Cambridge Encyclopedia of astronomy stole his picture. They took it from his from either from one former paper or from his PhD thesis, and they just put it there. And they never said where they got it from 1977. So in 1979, a graphic artist who was about to make a cover for a band found his picture in the Cambridge Encyclopedia of astronomy, and turned it into the cover of a vinyl record. Does anyone know which meant it was Ha, Joy Division. I tried this every time I got this. And I've, I've wondered whether over the years at some point, so nobody will know anymore. who this was. So this was Joy Division. And the album was called unknown pleasures. This is a post punk band sounds a bit like you may not know Joy Division, if you don't know Joy Division, that is probably because the singer you just heard in Curtis, he killed himself in 1980, after this album was released, and the remainders of the band formed a new band called New Order, which you may know, says sort of an electronic kind of band that was music, you might have may have heard, much more electronic, not as dark as this tempted to play another record, but let's not do that. And so this became part of pop culture. And these days, right, so then, then people actually had these busy people actually had these these T shirts, they were a big thing back then. So did these days, the kids wear, you know, like Nirvana T shirts. I actually had one of those when I was, I think 12 or 13, in high school. So by then I have to admit, like try division didn't exist anymore, because Curtis killed himself in 1980. But this thing just became such a cool iconographic, like picture why people didn't even know what the music sounded like, because it was like 13 years ago, I did actually sometimes listen to new order, but not to Joy Division sounded very different. But I didn't know because I was a nerdy kid in 1993 or so that this was something about pulsars, and about astronomy, and that it was cool science. So these days, of course, nothing matters anymore. And nobody knows what this is about. But you may have actually seen that as a Python package now called Joy plot that makes these plots for you. And they are not called annoyingly, they're not called craft plots, but joy plots, but you know, there you go. So if you do really, if you really spend the time visualizing your science really well, you can reach an exponentially larger audience, maybe a large section of humanity, so that even, you know 42 years later, 43 years later, I can go into a lecture hall and say Does anyone know what this is? And someone knows that it's Joy Division, and you probably only know that one picture right? Maybe you know the two songs of them maybe you've listened to the the album once you don't anymore because the audio is terrible. But it's it's this just this one scientific plot. This is providing so much excitement. It's so easy. trigging to people that they put it on T shirts that they carried around and that some, you know, 13 year old somewhere in southwestern Germany are treating it as some kind of, you know, that's what sciences, I'm excited about this as well. So spending time conveying your scientific message doesn't just make it more beautiful, it actually increases people's interest are also and this would have been a more drier way of telling the story. There are studies that papers that have nice, well designed figures and plots have a significantly higher probability of getting accepted the first time round, rather than if you have these kinds of just quickly hacked together pictures that are really ugly. So we should spend time, even if you're someone whose brain works more in terms of math, and they are these people, of course, and it's fine. If you're like that, maybe that's a great gift, you should know that there are many people who think in terms of pictures in their head. So if you spent time making the picture nice, you're just reaching way more people. Which is also why when we look at your submitted projects in two weeks on our so we obviously took a one week, we'll probably look very closely at your, at your plots as well. So with that, let's now talk about how they what they should actually look like. So for me, in a paper, there are no, there's a spectrum of what the plot is trying to achieve. And there are sort of two extreme ends of that spectrum. One of which are what you what are sometimes which are typically figure number one in the paper that the you might call them, like explanatory sketches. Where you draw a picture, try to explain what you're what you're going to do. And here is a picture like that. So this is actually it's actually a few years old. This is a plot from a paper that one of my PC students wrote the Kirkland SCA, my pointer is still not working. And I can't really fix it because annoyingly, they're, the part of my screen that doesn't work is the one word is where I could fix this, you see, now, okay, well, I'll put my mouse. So in this plot, there isn't really an experimental result yet. And it's supposed to just show what we're trying to do or what kind of model we're trying to build. So there's, there are lines in there that are actually numerically procedurally generated. But they're not like a scientific result. Instead, there are lots of labels that explain what the terms in the equations mean, how they relate to each other. So this is a business stochastic process that produces a bunch of figure a bunch of lines that have this property that they would be in the paper called quasi periodic. So they are the repeat in terms of structure along one period. So you can see up here, the kernel that produces these plots, in red, you see a perfectly periodic curve. In green, you see one that is sort of semi periodic, so it repeats every period. But it's not the same after a few periods. That's what we're trying to convey with this with this figure. And the bunch of parameters that control the behavior of this of this whole thing, there's a period for how long it takes to see the same thing. Again, there is an intensity for how wide this region is, there is a small length scale over which these functions wiggle up and down, and a long one over which there are periods of the case. That's one extreme, like a very descriptive plot. And at the other end, you have plots like this, that are just I did an experiment, and a bunch of numbers came out, I could have put them in a table, but that would be very difficult to parse. So instead, I'll make a plot so that you can look at it. And you can see that the experiment has certain properties, right? One line is above the others, they're smooth, they go up and down, they have certain values that you can read off, there's some special property that around one something magic happens and how it works again, for whatever reason, you might want to think about why that is, there's a reason for this, right? It has something to do with how the system is set up. And so that's the the empirical results. I don't just want to show you this one. Let me go hmm. But instead, here's an example of a very recent paper that just came out last week by a colleague said how back in in Copenhagen with two of his group members. And it's not important what this paper is about. But you can see that figure number one is one of these typical, and I picked him because CERN is known for making very, very nice plots is an example. Very well produced explanation of what's going on. And of course, you're not going to parse immediately what they're trying to do. It's a complicated, you know, basically method on America algorithm. But even for an American paper, you can see kind of it as they're trying to convey something. They feel like he's actually procedurally generated things that explain what they're trying to do. And then now, it's like, this is a spectrum. And you can sort of see this here that in this paper, as you go through the paper there, it becomes more quantitative. So there are more numbers, more comparisons of different methods, but it's still kind of like an explanatory plot at this stage, it sort of smoothly transitioning into telling a more quantitative story. There's also a bit of math, of course. And then, so here now we are getting like into, like implementation details. And at the end, there's also again, comparisons between methods still kind of actually not that like quantitative plots. Now, at the end, there is a set up of the experiments, what are the outputs, we get this pretty quantitative, but it's over is not yet an empirical comparison. And at the end, this is actual numbers, such as the ROC curve, basically have two things compared with each other and how they like you know, what kind of outputs you get. So when you're making plots, this is one way of thinking about what you're trying to achieve, you're telling a visual story, so that you could basically we just the figures, and then only start reading the paper afterwards. And in fact, many people do that. So many reviewers will open up your paper they flip through, because the figures are so prominent, especially if they're nice, they'll just look at the pictures and get an immediate impression that this person has clearly thought about what they're doing, right? It's clearly not a lot of time went into this, they laid it out rice, they must have stared at those plots for a long time. So they I can trust that this kind of probably makes sense. And then as you go through the paper, you start explaining how you did things, how you set them up, what are the properties of your data set, what is the final empirical result at the end to convince them that it actually works. So that's the storytelling part. Now to the more like the craftsmanship out, he actually draw a picture properly, so that it like works. And this is the bit where we're certainly going to talk about some things that you've heard before. So I could have just could just have a slide that looks like this, which doesn't have a picture. And I could have just said, you know, if you're making a plot, it's very important that every axis has a label, and that all the labels have units. And that the Xs have to write limits. So if you have something that goes from 00 should be in the plot. Sometimes one is important because you're talking about multiples, and then you need a legend. And you have to make sure that all the fonts work well. So I could have done the whole lecture like this in five minutes. But then I think the message would have been lost a little bit. Would you more largely agree with those? Well, okay, fine. So then, we don't need to talk much about them, except that, in practice, things are a little bit more subtle. So here's an example of a plot. This is a story that I'm retelling with some added stuff from nice book by David Spiegelhalter is a senior professor in Cambridge in the UK, he spent a lot of his time as a Bayesian statistician, but later in life became a an explainer of risk to the public. And during the corona pandemic, he became quite prominent, because he had this a lot of tweets about how things went wrong in how people thought about the data. This is an example from his book. It's a data set that collects this is actually an example that he reproduced from a plot that was in the newspaper about survival rates of pediatric heart surgery. So little children, typically newborn ones, get heart surgery in children's hospitals across the UK. So UK has a centralized healthcare system, there aren't that many large children's hospitals, these are basically all of them. And here the survival rates of the six of these surgeries. And you can see visually, well, actually, what do you see? Just honestly, without trying to find the catch. Yes. Yes, so for the people in the call tremendous differences. It looks like in London, the kids will survive. And Glasgow things are dire, right, which may be kind of plays into some narrative. Now, there's a lot of things that are wrong with this plot. And arguably, it actually tells a not a non story and makes it into a story. It's an example of lying with statistics. So maybe let's think about what's the first thing you could think about this plot that that is bad, but it was the first thing you notice. Yes, so are people in the call the labels on the x axis? So you actually notice that the survival rate ranges from about 96 to 99%. So almost all of these surgeries actually successful. But then again, you know, every 1% survival rate is maybe like one child's life per year. Who knows. So maybe this is important or not, we'll have to deal with this in a moment. There's something else though. That's more subtle about this plot. S So you're gonna have a bit louder? Ah, so very good. Very good. So you're saying that it might be for people in the call that the problem is that these are relative they are, the numbers are represented as percentages. But they are actually absolute numbers right of cases. And what we don't know is whether some hospitals have a much higher caseload than others. And in fact, this is actually true. So London, Great Ormond Street is the largest pediatric hospital in the UK. I happen to know because I used to live next to it. It's a huge, like brutalist thing. And there are certainly others in there that are way smaller. I think, for example, this Emelina one is a pretty small one. But there's a third thing. So this actually was collected to be columns now that we want to address in a moment, actually, I'll have the plots for those. Unfortunately, my slides are in a different order. So I'm looking forward to a third issue with this data. Maybe the least obvious one. Yes. Confidence Intervals. Yeah, they I mean, they're basically like the flip side to do with the to the problem that we don't have. They're not the absolute numbers. But I think a third issue is actually that whoever made this plot has decided to sort them by their size. And that immediately gives this subliminal message, that it's good to be at the top and bad to be at the bottom. Either. There's some ranking, this one like London is best and Glasgow was worst. If I would have sorted them alphabetically, they would look like this. But not alphabetically, I think it's random. And I think even just that already changes the story. I haven't changed the x axis yet. I haven't put in aerobars. But if you just saw this, maybe your first reaction isn't one of them is much better than the others, right? Maybe it's just some random points, right? And there's a bit of a spread. Okay, maybe it's random, though, right? So now, if we put in the zero, maybe that will address our issue of you know, we should realize that it's actually between 99. And whatever, if you do like this a lot looks like this. Now. Okay, so is this good or bad? I would argue that said, a lot of wasted whitespace. Right? It does bring across that all of these hospitals are actually you know, most kids are surviving. So that's maybe good, we'll, we'll get that. But then again, it's newborn kids heart surgery, we kind of expect that more than half of them survived, right? So this story that every plot should have a zero and the zero should always be on the y axis, it's a bit more subtle, I don't actually think it's strictly true. Now, if I think there's a wigger thing, that if it makes sense to put on zero, without completely messing up the plot, and it's a very good idea to put it in. And if there is some, you know, natural range that things lie in, that should include zero, and it feels like you're faking it a bit by zooming into the data, then maybe tripping. But it's not even just about the fact that they're part right. So sometimes people say, for bar plots, for example, you have to have zero everywhere. This is essentially a bar plot, right? It's just a different visualization of a bar plot is something that goes from zero to 100. And yet still at zero is not the right thing to put in. There's something about natural scales of the data. But what you should put in, I completely agree with you, those of you who said it is error bars. And if you do that, and I actually created so this part is not in this book, but he has the numbers in the book, the absolute numbers, so I use them to create aerobars. And leave it to yourself to think about how I make those error bars, like if I give you the actual numbers, right, total patients per hospital, and how many of them survived and think about how you would make an error bar on this, maybe, you know, lecture number, what four, then you see that actually, all of those error bars essentially overlap. And so this is not a p value, right? I'm not saying that this is a clear mathematical analysis. And at this point, maybe it might be good to actually do a proper significance test. And think about what that would look like. And the fact that we're essentially potentially doing multiple tests, right, and how to correct for those. Turns out speakers actually did this he was in he was part of a of a Commission created by Parliament to check whether there was some mistreatment of kids at some hospitals in the NHS system. And they found no significant in the results. So the null hypothesis that all of these hospitals are equally good cannot be rejected based on this data. And so if you go through the steps from what is in the newspaper, to what the scientist would look like, would look at, you can see that it completely changes the story. So just how you represent the data, how much information you include. plot how much how you how you draw the plot how you order the data, creates the story that you may want to, like may try to tell or the one that you should probably be telling. Okay, any questions to this? Any suggestions of things you would do differently? Yeah, so I don't. So the question for people in the call is, why is it a bad thing to rank them by an order of therapists. And of course, we often see this in the media, like plots in the newspapers are often done in this way. So I wouldn't say it's fundamentally the wrong thing to do. But I do think we can agree that it sends a message. And if I just go from this plot to this one, which hasn't yet changed anything else, but there's still no arrow bars? I mean, okay, I've left out the lines. But yeah, then I think we'll agree that a first look at this data looks different from a first look at this plot. But it's the exact same numbers, the only thing that's different is the order of the of the dots and the lights removed. So it's a bit of visual layout. And I think, at least, what I would say is that this representation at least creates maybe a first kind of impetus in your mind, that it might be random. And that one should examine further right, by getting maybe the absolute numbers and wrong error bars, and then you get to end up with this kind of story. But yeah, maybe there are sometimes cases where ranking isn't completely wrong, especially if you've convinced yourself that it's actually significantly older. You could even you know, so if you want really wanted to, not sure that's a good visualization. But what you could of course do is you could use those confidence intervals to resample the data, right, and make a bunch of other plots, and then check how often something ends up in the first first plot, in the first rank will even be a way of getting a confidence in the ranking. There's a question online? How could we include the size of the hospitals number of surgeries to the error bars or confidence over the account for this? Yes, so they do. So what I got here is that the May I made these plots is to get the absolute numbers of patients and how many people survived. And I'm not telling you how I turned them into a confidence interval. But you know, it's a discrete it's, it's one of these problems that we've discussed in lecture four, I think when we talked about confidence intervals. So, okay, now let's do a little bit of a hand exercise that I've no I've been known to sometimes do in exams as well, here are four curves, they are the same curves in each of the plots 1234. And the colors are the same right. So this function is the same as this function the same as this function is same as this function. And a obviously you need to point out that here the scales are linear, here, they are log linear, here they are linear log in a log log. So exercise for you write down which line is which function and try to read off the actual function, not just, you know, average absolute structure or abstract structure. Okay, I'll give you two minutes or so to talk to each other and try to figure that out. All right, good. Let's let's go through them one by one, and see if we can, you can figure them out all out. So first of all, before we talk about the actual functions, and we just point out the obvious thing, which, like, how, how would you look at at these plots? And notice that, like one line corresponds, or has a special role to play in each of these plots? I'm not sure I'm asking this right. So okay, everyone noticed that some of these lines are a straight line in some of the plots are not in the other. And every one of the function turns out to be a line in a straight line in at least one of the plots. Okay, so that's the important bit, right. That's the actual technique. Right? Okay. So now let's see if we can go from the left to the right and identify one line after the other. And also, okay, apologies to those in the call. I'll try and write very big on the blackboard. Maybe you can read it then. Okay. So let's start on the left, there's only one line here is a straight line is the red line. So what we can see, okay, that's someone wants to tell me what kind of function business the easy way out. So you can ask quickly, yes, it's a linear function. Why? Because let's really make this like very clear, because I know that people often get this wrong then even in the exam, right? So if you think of y and x here, then we have a function here that is such that y is a constant times x. And I was my check whether you can read this in the US. Maybe you can read it. If you fullscreen. If you fullscreen. I mean, I'll try and carry my laptop over here, but it's probably going to rip off lots of cables. Okay, and now what you can do is you could look at this plot and actually figure out what a is. Right? Right. Because on the right end of the plot, it goes through 10 and 10. Actually not particularly good plot, because I didn't put a line in for 10. And by the way, I should have maybe put a minor tick mark at 10. So what we can see here is that 10 is equal to a times 10. Right? So now we know what it is. It's one right? So this function is y is equal to x. Okay, next plot. So in this one, the blue dashed dotted line is a straight line. What kind of function? Is it? What kind of function is linear? On a log linear plot? That's a harder question. Yes. Ah, so one answer in the room is an exponential one. People in the chat are are making complaining they can't read it. It's reasonable to say, are we good? So is this an exponential function? Any other proposals? Something that's straight on a log linear plot? No, good. Pretty good. Okay. I sometimes I have to be, let's see if I can get the wrong. So what's happened here is that maybe I can write this out of when I put it. Let's see how far can walk so that you can Okay, I'll draw I'll draw over here. So here we have a situation where log of y is equal to a times x. Right? Okay, and we can again, try to beat this off. So if we go 10 To the right, then we get we go through two orders of magnitude on a scale of 10. So actually, it's a log 10 of y. Right? So two times log 10 of y is 10 times x. Right? So can we see her Let's hope I hope I get this right. Sometimes I'm just off on the backboard. So that means is that right? Actually, hopefully, so that means we can put the can take an exponential of 10 Right? So then that's how do we do this? Right? Sometimes when you're standing in front of a blackboard, it's just massively bad. Right? To Yes, okay at first, of course we first divide by two, right? Good to have distance. So, log 10 of Y is five times x. And so we get Y is X. Oops, no, it's 10 to the five times x. That's hope that's right. Is it? No? What is wrong? Yeah. Oh, wait, you're right. Ah, thanks. Okay. That's Ah, okay. I should have tried this before. So it's switch eight times. 10. Uh huh. Okay, now that's nothing. So better. So we have a times head over to how does why does this not work? Oh, yeah, no, because this one with the y as well. Yeah, okay, maybe it's a good idea for all of us to really rehearse this. So if we go 10, over, we go five, we get we go to up. So that's one in five. Okay. So log 10 of y is x over five. Maybe like this. Makes more sense. Now, and now we can be rephrase. And we'll see that y is 10 to the x over five. So that is an exponential function who believe Okay, now, next line, which one which was to be shown do not have yet. Okay, so the green one is straight in the third plot. What does that mean? Please, again, it must be logarithmic. Why? Because now let's see if I can get this thing to actually work. Why is a times log of x. And now we can basically just read off what he is right? And he actually in this plot, you can properly read it off. If I would do this in an exam, I would actually make it a bit more readable. It's an incline of one again. So if you go one to the right, you go from zero to one, to one order of magnitude, right? Right. And it's of course, a log base 10 of x. And that means y is log base 10 of x a is one here. And then finally, we have one that isn't yet a straight line, yet another two blood sets this pinkish one, the dashed one. And that's it. That's straight in the log log plot. So what's straight in a log log plot? A power law, it's one of these nice words that sometimes people miss. So it's a function of the form, y is x to some power, right? Why? Because log of y is a times log of x. So it's straight in this representation. And again, the basis here are 10 In each case, and that means y is x to the a, we just need to read off what A is. And here a is to go one order of magnitude to the right to go two orders of magnitude up. So it's x squared. And that's what a power law is. And notice that how in this plot this the red line is also straight. Because the linear function is also a power law. It's just a boring one, right? So here, y is x to the first power. Okay, so why am I showing you this? And there's already people complaining in the No, okay? Why am I showing you this? Because sometimes, you want to convince your reader that you have some hypothesis about how things grow, or one depend on the other and you've collected data and like to check it's actually true, like you've claimed your method is quadratically expensive, or it's stupidly expensive, or it's like the old method is exponentially expensive and the new one Whether it's a power law or it's just polynomially, expensive, the right, and then you need to choose a representation for your data that actually shows this relationship. So if you're arguing that you have a method that has a polynomial at one time, then you want to use a log log plot. And if you want to argue that you have a method that has a logarithmic runtime, we need a limb lock plot. And if you want to argue that there is something that is exponentially expensive, you need a log linear plot. And this is kind of obvious to say, but you wouldn't believe how often people get this wrong. Even like PhD students, I keep getting shown plots about something being exponential. And then there's just the picture like a big bendy line, right? And you can go Yeah, that looks like a curve that grows quickly, but could be a polynomial, right? Have you ever made a log linear plot? Oh, yeah, that's a smart idea. Yeah. Okay. So. So if you have data that is has a functional relationship, and you know what the functional relationship is supposed to be, then try and scale the axes, such that you can actually read off basically the relationship. This doesn't just work for power loss, and exponential functions. There are other transformations as well, right? Logic transformations. For example, if you have things that lie between zero and one, for example, the vaccination progress in various countries, I think it's actually interesting to look at them on a legit invertible or inverse sigmoid transform, they often tend to be straight lines by because you get this rapid increase as you go through the majority of the population. And at the beginning, at the end, there are different factors that slow things down, either because you don't have the vaccine yet, or because people stopped getting vaccinated. And then, when you make such a plot, it's a good idea to actually show the data in it. Obviously, I haven't done this here, because it's just a sort of an exercise. But when you have a real empirical data, it may be a good idea to actually make sure you're showing the real data. So here's an oh, by the way, so we got it right. For us, I was checked. Here's an example that I found quite interesting of this. Everyone knows what this person on the right is by now is like Germany's most famous living scientist at the moment. Chris and Lawson's group had a paper very early on in the pandemic in like, early 2020. That made national news and of because he claimed, with his research group in the in the charity, that children had a similar viral load to adults. And that, of course, was very important in the early decisions to close down. Kindergartens, right back then the early phase of the of the pandemic, people didn't really know, you know, who gets infected? Is this virus dangerous for kids? Or not? Can children infect their parents or not? Do they even get infected. And so they did a study with a group where they collected PCR statistics for from patients COVID patients in the charity. And this plot was in the preprint, they sent this out. It was just a preprint. It wasn't published yet. It was going through review, and there was a total shitstorm on Twitter about it. Partly because people had a psychological opinion about it, they didn't even want to see the data, partly because some people like statisticians complained about the way they represented the data. Among them, David Spiegelhalter of fame from the previous plot I showed you before, he had a Twitter thread about how this is a dangerous way to represent the data. So what do you think is a problem with these plots? First of all, anyone nobody's thoughts are called violin plots, yes? And do you actually think for yourself? Do you know how they are created, like in detail? It's easy to cut. I think very few people have actually ever written code to create these kind of plots, you typically just call a library that does it for you. And maybe you think about it, you realize you don't really know what it's doing. Right? So that's maybe a first part of the problem. And it's actually a much more prominent one. Check the chat. The scaling of the Y axis. So this is a log logarithmic y axis. Right? And it's actually a good point. Right? That so they are in these higher age groups. So all the adults basically, there are some cases that have very high viral load that the children don't really have. I think the bigger problem is that they have decided to stratify the data into age groups that are completely arbitrary. They are not causal for how, what the data actually represents. So, a little bit later, because there was so much criticism, they actually released an updated plot, where which I then went from which I grabbed the data with a little bit of like some black magic, which so I could create my own nuclei, they didn't actually release the data. Unfortunately, I think they did that because they wanted to preserve anonymity of their patients, medics always very careful with the data, you don't really want to give it out, which is a big problem for like scientific advances in medicine. But if you look, if you take the plot that is in the appendix of their later preprint, and extract the data, it looks like this. So this is probably not exactly the same data set, but it's very close to the original one. You can think of each of these data points probably has like an arrow bar of like, a few pixels on this plot. And now you can see that there's actually there is actually structure in this data set that you couldn't see before. And that data has something to do with the structure, something to do with how they collected the data. So the I mean, the situation is that they're in the charity, they're not in the children's hospital, they're in the virology department of the general adults hospital, that's where the research group is. So they got a lot of data from their local colleagues, which of course only have adult patients. So that's why you see very few data points below 20. And a lot from higher. The next thing is that they only got this data, of course, from people who were in the hospital. And children, as you know, don't end up in the hospital as often with COVID. And so they got some extra data, actually from a pediatric unit. And this is the smaller data set here. Now, if you see the data like this, it I would say it's much harder to see structure than than in this plot. But it is actually maybe even easier to see the kind of structure they were going for, because the argument they were trying to make at the paper is that if you look at this dataset, there isn't really a trend, from the left to the right. Are you could you get the sense that maybe children have just as much virus in their bodies as the adults, right? So one thing you could do is you could resample, Across Ages, so that the data is equally sparse across the whole range to maybe visually convince you, in the end, they actually did some fancy statistical analysis that it's logistic regression over age with all sorts of pre factors on the logarithm of the Y load with some, you know, Bayesian analysis to it with a gamma factor for the rate of a time as a prior and then found that they couldn't find a functional relationship that could couldn't find a reason to reject the null hypothesis that children have just as much virus in their body as adults have when they're sick. So it's actually a very complicated story. Because in the end, I think, I get the message of the paper, and I even agree with it. So based on this data set, it doesn't really seem likely that children don't, in fact, their parents, maybe they do. And that was the actual point they were trying to make back then. Because they chose a particular presentation, people got all hung up on the stratification and the way that it was presented and the color choices and you can't do anything, I think if they would have just shown this data set, it would have been actually much better for their message. So even though arguably, this one is an uglier plot, and this one, right, this is nice, a colorful, you get these individual groups, violin plots, colorful background, why this is probably I don't know, gg plot in our or were some some Python library. I don't know seaborne, and it looks nicer. But actually, it's missing like it's, it's, it's artificially introducing structure into the representation that isn't actually there, it's much better to show the raw data. So if you can, in your plots, leave the actual data in, just show what the real data looks like without post processing. That isn't always possible, because maybe you have like a billion data points, or maybe your data points are 50 dimensional, then you have to think about what you do. But if you can, if you have a two dimensional situation, and you can actually plot the whole data set, then why not do it? I mean, maybe one reason would be privacy, but then come on, it's not like I can pick out one patient for this. Especially I don't, since I don't even know, you know, whatever the loads are, I mean, maybe maybe there is like a special special patient, like you know that someone who was nearly 100 years old was in the shower at in like March 2020. And then you could figure out whatever the load was, but Okay, so the next thing on my laundry list of stuff I want to do is I'm mostly just going through some points that are frequent confusions that aren't really like related to each other, I think, is we see where we are with time is averaging. So here's a whoops two functions that are like my simulated version of learning curves. So I created these in a random way, I'm not going to tell you how. But let's say I did experiments with a, I don't know, let's see, I trained a bunch of deep neural networks, which are optimized. These are all learning curves. So you see as a function of the epochs over training, some, you know, precision, or some, maybe it's training loss over time, right. And I ran the optimizer, what 10 times. And now I can make two plots, I could plot in a, on a linear linear scale on a log linear scale. Now, maybe I want to represent this population of experiments, not through these lines, because at some point, I'll have 100 lines, and it'll be very difficult to read them off. But I want to create a shaded region around where that what the values are. So then, one thing I could do is, I could compute the mean and the variance of those numbers, and then make a region around it that is centered that the mean plus minus one standard deviation, or plus minus two standard deviations, if I do this with the data on the left, so with the test error, it looked like this, it looked like this. And if I plot this region in the log space, it looks like this. And what you can see is that actually, it's it's not even properly possible to do this, because there are some regions here where this region actually goes beyond zero. And then of course, a lot plot doesn't make sense. It's just not defined over there. And maybe this kind of region looks not so bad to you. But this one clearly looks wrong, right? This doesn't look like it's representing what's actually going on. I could also take the average the mean and standard deviation over the log test era, the thing that's plotted here, and then the plot would look like this. And so I'm going to argue that this is the better plot. Why? Because these regions, this region of uncertainty, it's only in the physical range, right? It doesn't go beyond zero. And in this plot, it just looks right. But there are people out there reviewers, I've had the situation with a paper A while ago, who will say you have a lot to do that that's wrong. Right? That's just like what but you've collected testable. That's the number you've collected? Why can you just average the lock that seems wrong, just because you're plotting on the log axis. But that's a mistake you made was taking the plot, you have to go back and take the average of the actual thing you collected. And I disagree. Why? Because what's actually going on here. So what we're saying is, we have a set, we have some data that comes from from actual distribution, it comes from some actual real, like, stochastic process that I could that I can define as this algorithm that runs and runs and does something and it produces numbers. Those numbers have some distribution, I have no clue what that distribution is. Right. And of course, I can make an argument that if I keep doing this forever, then by the central limit theorem, because if I run the algorithm in an IID fashion, that is going to be Gaussian distributed fine. But that's only going to be true, you know, in the absolute limit. And I can make the exact same argument for the log of the test error. Right? He's also just, it's just a transformation of a random variable. It's another random variable. So these arguments that asymptotic the something is Gaussian apply in both on the left and the right. But I do know something about this number, I know that it's strictly positive, for example, and I have an alpha hypothesis, that the log of this thing has some kind of property, right, it kind of goes down, at least for a while. It's kind of linear. And I don't have a proper mathematical theory for why exactly exactly looks like this, actually, in this case, I have because it's fake data. But but if I wanted to convince you that it sort of drops, you know, like something like it's almost like an exponential function, then it's actually better to do the average in this in this regime. So just because I do a post processing step of the numbers that my algorithm plotted out, doesn't mean that the transform variable is somehow worse or in more incorrect. So take the average over. This is actually a very frequent thing. Like I see a lot of people who have who make look plots, and then have these weird error bars that look like this. I think the reason that is actually happens is that to make the plots mechanically ENCODE, right, you plot the thing on the left, and then there's a call to the library afterwards, we set the scale to logarithm. And so mentally, it's a different thing, right? You kind of go like Oh, I first operate with this data, compute the mean, the variance and error bars and the data and then Take a look. And then I just plot them. And then I just tell the plotting library to make the scale lock. But actually, when you do that you're implicitly arguing, see a few slides ago that this is really the distribution you care about. Okay, it's a minor point, but it keeps happening, I keep seeing people do this. Now let's have a series of slides about shading. One of my favorite topics. So I like shaded plots, here's a, here's a line. Oh, by the way, sometimes you don't have to use color. And like, it's not like every plot has to have RGB values and be totally colorful, if you just want to plot a line and a bunch of points. Black is totally fine. Right, it can look very nice and minimal. Now, if you have some additional information about this, like some uncertainty, for example, then you may want to use a shading, you might use, you know, colors to highlight the data and even an animation to make it look fancy. And what I've done here is I've used the shading. So if you've not been in the probabilistic machine learning lecture yet, but you'll you know, next next time, you'll hear about Gaussian processes, this is a Gaussian process, it's a bunch of draws from a Gaussian distribution. And it's as a silly way of animating it that I, I'm kind of proud about, because I came up with it. But um, so what I what what's more important than this plot is the the gray scale in between. So what's happening here is that in each at each point in in x space, there's a marginal Gaussian distribution, such that all of these points are jointly Gaussian distributed. So you know that Gaussian distributions are not boxy, right? They're not, they don't look like this, they look like this. So you'd like to convey this visually in a picture that has kind of a high probability to be in the middle, and a decrease in the low probability to be outside. What I'm trying to do here is to do this with shading. And the way I did this actually is the grayscale value is at each point in x space. It's the value of a Gaussian PDF, so the exponential of a square without a normalization constant, so without the one over square root of two pi, not gonna write it down, because then people in the chat can read it. But it's so a Gaussian is, you know, exponential to the square divided by the square root of two pi times the standard deviation. So the width of this plotting region, so I got rid of this bar was one over the square root of two pi. Because then you can see the gray scale, if I didn't do this, and just showed the gray scale in terms of intensity at each at globally, for all the plots, it would look like this. So you can see that the region in the middle is grayish, and to the left on the right is totally white. Is that different visualizations that maybe highlight different aspects of the plots, right? So in this region, you can see that there is basically very low density everywhere. But this one maybe also represents something else. You can also do this in a flat shading that would look like this. That's maybe easier to print. But it really leaves out this kind of additional information that things are actually kind of smoothly changing. You can also use a pattern that looks really ugly, so don't use patterns. The reason I'm actually okay, maybe I'll have one more on these. So I'll get back to this in a moment. As an example, machine is struggling to stay afloat is, you could now convince yourself that maybe 101 of these, one of these two is better than the other. And you could ask me how I set the grayscale value, right? Why is it not? deep, dark black right in the middle? Why have you made it such actually it doesn't go all the way to one for darkness value. So it just goes up to like 50% Gray, and then back down again? Why is that the right thing to do? I'm setting up an argument for coming in later, it's going to be our eyes are nonlinear when it comes to grayscale and color anyway. So let's forget about any, like explicit rule for how grayscale should be translated onto ink on paper. Let's continue with that in a moment because it's related to to color as well. So color of course, is a huge topic. People have strong opinions about color, if you go to the matplotlib page for not doing anything. Ah, okay. Should have not done that. Oh, let me just fix this. I know it's here. It's just in a different, annoyingly different Ah, well, okay, I'm going to close it in the moment. And then you can know you can find lots and lots of color maps, right? And I recommend that you have a look. It's the sort of thing that you can't be I can't really tell you all about but the just point out a few obvious things that you may have not thought about so far, which is that there are different color maps that represent very different kind of goals. So if you have data that goes from like this discussion process I just showed you, that goes from nothing to something, then one of the sequential color maps is good. When you go from white, nothing to something, some color, or the other way round, right from something to nothing. And then there would you have to revert those color maps. If you have data that, well, this is another version of this, actually, that doesn't go from white to something, but you know, from one color to the next, sometimes that's fun as well. If you have data that is centered on zero, that is either negative or positive, it's either very bad or very good, then you might have want to have something that's white in the middle, and then goes to two different ends of the color scheme. On the left and the right. And there are lots of tools for these. A, there's also, you know, cyclic ones, these are more rare, like you need to go from, you have data that sort of wraps around a circle, and you want to have a basically a like a continuous circle on this. And then if you have data that just goes that has just has different categories, then there are color maps for those as well. And then there are various special use case, students like for example, for maps that have to go, you know, to Brown for like big ocean, and mountains and so on, and all sorts of cool tricks. Now, I so I don't want to spend too much time on this, just to find out that's obviously an issue. And people often just use the standard color map that comes with matplotlib. I think if we read is this one at the moment, or maybe CV does anybody have changed it now. and not think about it. And that's bad. Think about the data you're trying to represent, think about what kind of properties it has, and then use the right color map. And then ideally use a color map. But these days, the tools do that automatically. That is what's called visually what we should be constant or perceptually constant. So that like that the greenness relatively stays the same or changes in a continuous fashion because there are people in the world who are colorblind, and they have a problem. Seeing color, I want to convey how this what kind of problem this is. So here is a plot that comes from one of our papers that was published last year. It's a big old, Fancy Heat Map. And this is from the original version of the paper that we submitted in 20, early 2020, I think. And so you don't have to understand what's going on here is a comparison between a bunch of things relative to each other. And you can see maybe actually, about 90% of you will be able to see that some of these comparisons go badly for the competitor. And some of them go well to look better, right? Because the red stuff is when things go bad. And green stuff is when things go well. So if you are red green colorblind, then this plot looks like this. This is an app that simulates this. So for those of you who didn't see a change at the moment from one flower to the next while you probably already know, because that's a very extreme version of it. This is like the most extreme red green colorblindness. And you can't really tell anything, right? I hope you agree. And so what we did, actually someone one of our reviewers pointed out that that's a problem. They said, I can't read this plot because I'm colorblind make a better plot. So in the next version of this of this paper that got accepted, in the end, we changed the color scheme to a blue and orange one. Let me go to the like, this is the one four. This is what it looks like for colorblind people. This is actually what it looks like in reality for those who are not colorblind. Now there are people who actually have a problem with yellow blue. So this is what this plot would look like for them. And actually, sorry, it's yellow. It's this one. Yeah. And so you can still make of what's going on. Right. And so that's the reason why this works is that we deliberately didn't choose a yellow bluish combination, but an orange blueish one that kind of lies in between the two different versions of colorblindness so that hopefully everyone can still read it. So I recommend this is actually is actually an issue, right? And a video comment using a tool like this. So about about 8% I think of all of the entire population is colorblind. And for men, it's like 18% that right? Look it up yourself doesn't really matter, but it's a significant proportion of the population. You're not leaving out a very, very small fraction of of people who ever have some kind of disability. In fact, you're actually making a plot that a significant number of them relation can't read. And it's so I've tried done this before in lectures. In a room like this. I would expect that there's probably one person in here Actually, there's a high majority of males in this room. So it's probably two people in this room. Who can, who could not see this plot. But can Henry this one? I hope so. So, which brings me to like some of the final points, which I tried to make before with greenness? So have you thought about maybe you've probably heard about color before. It's like a big fancy. Science, right? People really care about color. And you've probably seen plots like this. So depending on which system you use, it seems color is really difficult. There is RGB or CMYK, there is HSV. That's this one, or HSL, right hue, saturation, and luminance, and various other ways of representing color. Now, if you're like me, you may think why is this so complicated? No good. John was come hungry to spend a significant part of his scientific career trying to figure out color, it was like a big book on color. Why is this? So cotton difficult? Color is just frequency of light, right? So everything you need to know is the frequency and the intensity. So the amplitude and the frequency of the of the wave? And that's it. So two dimensional space? How can this be so hard? Right? It's just two numbers. Does anyone know? Why do you get like Adobe spending so much time getting colors? Right? Why is there all these column map things and people draw cones and triangles and simply axes and reels of color with complementary colors that someone has something to do with each other? Why is that? Yeah, someone says it's our brain. Yes, actually, it's the part of our brain that sits right in the front of the face, not in the back. It's our eyes that are weird. So our eyes have actually four different kinds of cells that are sub grooved into rods and cones. The cones are for color. And there are three of them, the SDM, and the L one, therefore, people say they are for red, and green, and blue, RGB might actually they're more complicated, they overlap with each other like this. So this is their absorbance properties. So how much electricity how many signals, how many, how often they fire into the brain into the nerve, the optic nerve as a function of how many photons they receive. And when you can see that those these three lines, the red and the green, and the green, they are not the same, they're not even shifted relative to each other, they are actually different, right? So here, they the red, and the green ones are the same again, and the blue one is a different shape than the other ones. And the reason for this is that these are actually I mean, we are squishy meat machines, right? So they use very different chemical processes. These three different types of cells, they have different proteins inside that react to absorbing a photon, and then creating a signal through some cascade of signaling down the chain. I mean, there are some people in New York who studied bioinformatics and medical informatics, so I really, you know, there's much better than me, you can't really expect them to have the same clothes. Oh, and then there's this fourth type, the cones, which are or something the rods, right, so the colorful ones are the cones, and this one is the rods, this dashed line here. And these these are, by the way, the peaks at where they are most sensitive to light. So these are, you know, green, and red and blue. And then the roads have this property that they are more spread out. So it's like a color that is separate from all the other colors that overlaps kind of all of them, although not much more than the others is baby basically, as broad as broad and white as the, as the blue ones are bought, this plot doesn't show the plot from Wikipedia. But it doesn't show is that this, that dashed dotted dashed line is actually 10 times higher than the other ones. So the rods are much, much more light sensitive, we talk about them as kind of our black and white vision. And so when it gets dark, if I switch off the light, when I'm not going to do it to people, then your eyes like we adjust actually, maybe let's try it. So the we adjust from the like some part of your brain just switched the way that they that he collects information. And actually, the intensity of the colors on this slide have probably changed a little bit. I switched back on again, maybe you'll notice that the colors go down a little bit. And so the reason for this is that we have these overlapping sensors, and the rods actually aren't black and white. They are arguably kind of you know, in between green and blue. But as you increase or decrease the intensity of the light. They take on a different role in your view. If it's very dark, you get scotopic vision so like it's only the rods, and at night all the cats are gray and if you have lots of lights, then the other three types of cells can start working and you get to see colors. What's the last Story of behind this is that color intensity. And by extension grayness intensity doesn't really mean anything. Because it depends on the lighting that the person reading, your plot is sitting. In particular, if someone is looking at your paper on a screen, which many people now do, when they are backlit, right, so greyness will look different. And if they're looking at it on a color inverted dark mode screen, they're going to look different again. And if they printed out on a piece of paper, and instead of light going through a filter that filters out some of the lights or LED backlight going through a filter, instead, you have ink on paper that reflects light that comes from another source. And the same grayness value means different things depending on how you print them. So it's a bit of a complicated story for this here, you may have heard that there's something called a gamma correction. So as you increase the density of grayness on, in, like the size of the dots of the of the printer, the grayness doesn't increase linearly, it actually kind of, so if you go, you're this at the bottom, this is kind of linearly increasing the number of whites or linearly increasing the number of black on the screen, then you can see that this this particular this bottom line, maybe at least, I would argue that it doesn't really feel like a linear progression. It's more like some kind of, kind of curve that looks a little bit like this. And there are people who try to correct for this with this gamma correction you see up here. So this is supposed to look a little bit more linear from zero to 100%. Long story short, if you're making a plot like this, then don't vary. If anyone comes along and says, Ah, you must be using, you know, this is this is not bright enough, or explain to me how exactly you turn these numbers into greatness. Greatness just doesn't mean anything. And actually, color doesn't really mean anything, either. It's, it's a visual, it's a visual representation that you can use to help guide the census of whoever reads it. But it's not something that is has a clear quantitative, meaning. There's no map from zero to 100%. to, actually, so that means, you know, maps like this, they really just helped the eye. But you have to put in the actual numbers, you cannot expect someone to be able to read off from color, what the value of the line is, the way that they could read off the value of the line from you know, a plot like this, where you can just you know, this is actually something that quantitatively means something. So color is useful, but it's a much weaker kind of thing to do. Final thing I want to get across is also think about the connection of your fingers. This is a very often a problem, because what happens is you write your paper. So first you do the science, you do the round, you do the experiments, outcomes, the outcomes, the results, you make the nice plot in Python in Jupiter, and make it nice, it's a beautiful plot. And then you've written the paper and then you plug you see the finger goes there, and then the signal goes there, and then that you've written the nice text. Oh, and then, like a day before the deadline, you realize you haven't written the captions yet. Of course, yeah, that's I mean, these figures, obviously, this is what is interesting. And then often, you can actually get these captions that are just not even readable. Like, it's just they clearly just plugged it in five minutes before the deadline because they had to put in a caption, and it's very difficult. So really think about what you want to write in the caption, maybe even use visual representations like such that such that the legend could move outside of the figure into the, into the caption, that's not always a good idea. Sometimes it is, if you have like, qualitatively different things you might want to plug in there. That's an option. Which brings me to the final, most important point, how do you actually do all of this mechanically, on your computer? So how do you actually make your figure? In the end? You will now most of you will currently be working? If you're working on your data for your project. Maybe with Python scripts, maybe with Jupiter, maybe you have your own? Maybe it's art or whatever. Right? Julia? I don't know what your favorite tool is. You've made plots. How do you get those into your paper? It sounds so easy. All you have to do is call in Python. If you're using PI plot you just called plot say fig, right plot dot say fig with a PDF. Of course you know you wouldn't do a PNG, right, Christine? She's a nasty you do PDFs Right? Like no graphics. Nice. Okay. And then you just you just in, in latesh. Hopefully you everyone knows. It's just you know, include graphics with text with name of the figure and there's your paper. And then this is the kind of paper I get sent by PhD students is actually a paper that we published in the end. It's one of my more well cited papers. So I use it as an example as a bad example. What's wrong with this figure for these figures? Yes. So the fonts are off. small font, someone says in the in the call as well, you can read them, they're too small. And then I, and then I write back like the students send me disabled through for feedback and anger like, yeah, funds are too small. And then they roll their eyes and go like, Nope, I wanted to actually I want to get actual feedback from you, I want you to just tell me what the text should be like, maybe Please edit the intro signal, go back, come back with the real figure. And then you can talk about the text. Like nobody saw this. Everyone reads fingers on screen, you can zoom in writes, and then you can read it can't be that hard. No, it just looks ugly. Clearly, and yes, not everyone prints our papers. But if I have to zoom in to get us like, that's just it shows that you haven't really thought about the plot that you're one of these people who think the plot is just like a stamp I have to make because everyone forces it's like the references I have to put in citations. Yes. But it shows that you haven't really thought about the plot. So getting on why this actually happens is this is annoying break in your pipeline, you've written your you've written your plot in Python, let's say, or I don't know, MATLAB, I go, and then use this back end that just creates a PDF. And the problem is that Tyson doesn't know what you're doing with this plot afterwards, it made this plot to fit maybe into a Jupiter window, right. And actually, I made such a plot here. Let me go see if I can. Up. So I tried this. Last week, I made a plot actually, I had a hypothesis, little side story that those of you who give feedback late for the lectures tend to give lower scores. I noticed this because I tend to look at the scores after the lecture. And then again, at the end of the week, and alpha, notice that the score goes down. Nothing. Maybe there's something about people watching the video, the recording afterwards having a worse opinion of the lecture, because they're not there and no data, no, don't get the excitement. And so I made a plot. And what you can see here is I'm plotting for each lecture, each each plot is one lecture, I'm plotting as a function of the log of time from the start. So I'll take the very first entry, which typically happens right after you believe, and then just take the time since then, and run a log scale, because then everything fits into one plot, the general quality score, so that goes from one to five. And you can see this here, like for each for each lecture, and one lecture is missing. That's the one that Professor market did where we didn't collect feedback. And yeah, okay, so you can stare at that, actually, I think maybe my hypothesis was wrong, it might have been some anecdotal evidence, I don't really think there is a significant kind of step down over time, maybe here is a case of that. But for the other ones, maybe not so much. So if you're watching this, on Thursday, please give feedback as well. But maybe what you're actually noticing here is this plot is too small, right? So this happens, because I have to have a lot of different sub figures. And I made a mistake of setting the size of this finger badly. So I should have maybe set this like to something more like like this, then it would look a little bit better. But I actually messed something up, okay, I shouldn't be valid, then it would look maybe a bit better. Yeah. But it's still a little bit off. And then like this, what this this, this line is too far down these overlap with each other a little bit. And if I would not just create a PDF out of this, it may actually go back to the what I had before the 10 and then make a PDF out of that. Which I actually do here, I call this thing, which makes the makes the plot then I'll get well, okay, I mean, you can guess what the PDF looks like, I can open it. And that if I put this into my paper, if you put a plot like this into your project report, it's going to look exactly like like this, right? It's gonna have totally off font sizes. So if you had taken this course, a year ago, I would have told you that there's this beautiful timeline, a pipeline called chicks plot lip in Python, that produces tech output ticks that you can then parse in ticks in latex and have Latech create your fingers for you. That's actually what I do for most of my slides. So these are all generated by lytic. And the nice advantage of this is that because latex is doing the layouting for you, the car, the part of the tool chain that is supposed to do the layout and actually does the layout thing. So you get the right font, the right font size, you can read it, and you know, like you can see how wide it's supposed to be and so on. But there's a few downsides to this. One of them is that if you make complicated plots in 3d with, you know, images in the background and so on, they tend to be messed up a little bit. Also, you create very complicated file structures, your later compilation might might run really long. And other things you know, can go wrong. And then sometimes actually, students have come to me and say, I always say I have to fix but this doesn't work, I ran the code, it looks bad, the layouting is bad. So I ended up just doing the PNG again, because it's so easy, and it just works. But the funds off. So we've made your whole life much easier. Because about three months ago, Nico, crema, this guy was hoping some of you know, as a tutor for some of your of your tutorials. And I, we sat down and we bought a library that fixes this issue once and for all. It's called two plots, because it's the plots we do in giving in, and you can find it on GitHub, you can install it like this. And what it does is it provides a collection of all the complicated changes you have to make in matplotlib, to get the exact right layout for a paper as a function of which conference you were submitting to. So there are some libraries for new rips, which is the one you should use in your writing your report, because it's a numerous layout. There's one for HTML for J and R. And we also have one for the slides that I use for this for this lecture. And it works like this. So you just import this library. And then you say, update the parameters of matplotlib, or pipe load using the course correct stuff for this conference. And if you do that, then, so this is the exact same code as before, I'm just adding this one line at the top, then the exact same plot looks like this. So what has happened is it has changed the font to the font that neurips uses for its text, it has changed the relative height and width of the figure it set the relative size correctly, it's using the right functionality in pipeline to constrain the layouting so that all the labels are at the right point. And it's scaled everything correctly. And it's producing a PDF that you can now include in your paper with include graphics, without even any optional arguments, you don't even have to say width is equal to text with you just leave it out. And it's going to be the right shape for your plot. So if you like this, please use it when you use it give Nico at least a star on GitHub, because he spent a lot of time doing this. If you find the bug, it's a three month old project. So send them up at least an issue maybe a pull request, if you know what the fixes. And please do try to get your plots for your project reports. To be properly laid out, you can do that by using this library. And I think that's the easy way out, because you will just know that it's correct. And you don't have to think about it. It's very straightforward. By the way, maybe not use this plot context, somehow there's something wrong with the font use of matplotlib is somehow a bit unstable with these contextual uses, like maybe try this line rather than this one. But it's just going to solve your problems for you. And if you didn't write your master thesis or your research project report with one of my colleagues, just use that library and tell them about it in their in their group so that you can virally spread, and no one will be and you'll you know, you'll get something for it. Because your your master's advisor will immediately go Oh, that's nice, right. And they'll immediately know that you've spent a bit more time on your plots that you've thought about the experiments, that probably this is a more reliable kind of piece of science. And then they're mentally if they people like me think about plots in terms of graphics, atoms of science in terms of visual objects, they may then have the mental piece to actually look at your text, and your derivations and your math and find the actual things that you want to get right. Rather than having to send you back and say these plots are ugly, we won't ever get a piece of paper published like this. So at the end of it, and I think plots are very important. They are just as important as the math, because they provide a quantitative channel to provide information about which experiments you did, how they worked, how you set their parameters, and they are there, they're just as important to convince your reader that what you do make sense as a mathematical proof is. And there are many people who think this way, even very advanced senior scientists, some of the best minds in the world work like this. So it's a good idea to take this into account. And if you do this, then adhere to some of these simple rules that we discussed today. And use a tool chain that ensures that the plot actually looks nice in the end, and this doesn't have to take too much time. So what this library does for you is that it provides all of these changes that I would otherwise have to tell you about individually, specifically for your layout. All right, thank you very much. Please provide feedback as early or late as you want to. And I'll keep maybe I'll rerun this analysis and see if I've had a causal effect on what people do and I'll see you next week for the penultimate lecture and goodbye to everyone in the call 

