Okay, quick check whether you can hear me if you can hear me then please. I don't know triply tie something into the chat. And you should be able to see the screen now as well. Can anyone hear me? Can you? Yes. Okay. Thanks a lot. But now let's see if this works. Oh, okay. All right. Great, then, thank you all very much for being back here. This is actually a larger group than usual human presence, at least also refer you online. Happy New Year to everyone. I hope you're alive and well and either recovered over and sick. So I because we have a lot of stuff to do, I want to go quickly through some admin stuff at the beginning. And then we can move on to the main content of the lecture. So as always, the feedback from last lecture, this was the one right before Christmas, we talked about fairness in algorithmic decision making, people seem to quite like that lecture, the speed was probably quite good. The main feedback was that people enjoyed this PCA example. And they would have liked even to talk even more about it. Mostly, actually. And the last two slides on fairness concepts are a little bit too fast, I acknowledge that. And two more things, I should say, are a it's now time this time of the year where you have to sign up for the exam. So here comes a little bit of a boilerplate thing that I have to say every term actually, for the exam, please sign up with me for this course for the exam by going to ETS, I deliberately didn't put a QR code here, because then you would just it's a little bit too easy to accidentally sign yourself up for an exam, right? So you have to actually go to alias there is a group called first exam, sign up, sign up for that, if you want to take the first exam, which will be on the 12th of April 930. Starting sharp, in sorry, no, that's wrong on the 15th of February, that's the first exam and 11. In here, when we'll see whether we need more lecture halls, there'll be a second exam for which there is no sign up yet, which will be on the 12th of April. Quick reminder, in this course, the rule is that you do not have to take the first exam, you can decide to only take the second one without taking the first one. However, if you fail the first one, you can then take the second one, if you fail the second one, that's pretty much it because the next opportunity then to take another exam will be a year later. And it will be a different course run by Professor Mark. The other thing I should say is that the official evaluation of the course is now in, you can actually find the full evaluation on ETS, I uploaded the entire PDF, if you want to look at the whole thing. It's quite long. But if you want to have a look over all the signal is quite positive people seem to enjoy the course the grades are fine, all the traffic lights are green. And the main feedback people are providing is that you like the atmosphere and the way that it's rendered is based on examples and code and it's a relatively high level. However, not everyone is very happy about this high level nature. Some people think it's should be a little bit more well, either the exams, the exercises should be harder, or they should be easier, or the the math we should spend more time on math and maybe we should do less math. I think actually, that overall the feedback from that is that on average is relatively that we are on the right kind of track with this course. There were also a few pieces of feedback that I didn't fully understand someone wrote in German that they would like to have more real data literacy content without stating what that is. I'm not sure what you're looking for there. I think this is what this course should be in particular Not just given the title of the course, but also given its role within the larger scale machine learning master course. And 11% For people out of 35, who responded to the feedback to the to the evaluation at ticks the box saying that there is no zoom call for this lecture that it's a purely in person lecture. So maybe that gives also a data point on how closely people read the questions. Okay, so that was the feedback bit. And I'm going through this relatively quickly, because I won't have time for the main lecture, not because I didn't read the evaluation, I actually spent quite some time reading it, I read everything you wrote. So this is just like, because I don't want to spend too much time today on this. And you can read the whole thing, if you like, on it. Yes. So what should we talk about today, and you can already already saw the the typical problem with my mouth. The title is a issue like I have a bold name electrophile future at lecture on the relationship, specifically between computer science and AI and machine learning in general, like in general, in particular, and the climate question. So why such a lecture? So first of all, I know that I mean, your generation, everyone has thought about the climate, you've been to lots and lots of presentations and talks and videos, and you've watched everything. This is not going to be yet another lecture where I just tell you that there's a big problem with the climate that might be a bit silly to do. And it's also I mean, maybe you are, you're thinking, Oh, it's like the headache has some personal zeal to talk about the climate. Maybe that is true. But I do think that within this course, there is actually exactly there has to be one lecture on climate. Why for at least three different reasons. The first one is that I'ma change is just such a fundamentally, shell, the fundamental challenge for humanity is such a big thing that everyone has to think about it at least some of the time. And at a point in time, where even you know, artists and museums are thinking about their climate footprint, and whether they have to, you know, decide to switch off their air conditioning, and even let some some paintings rot to save some co2. It's important that we as computer scientists, as technologists also think a little bit about our footprint. And where else in your course, should that happen? If not, in one of these, you know, catch all lecture courses, like data literacy. But there's also a reason to do it specifically in this course. And that's that there is actually a big question about data and its role in our understanding of climate change. In fact, actually, I think a large part of our problem at the moment is, and I'll talk about this a little bit today, that large parts of the population feel overwhelmed with the information that is provided in a opaque way, in a in a, in an overly complicated and low level way that makes it very difficult to think about the main problem. And the third reason is that actually, computers do use energy, as you probably know, and there is a serious question about what kind of role we can play as computer scientists as AI people in a making computers, use less energy or not use more energy, and be maybe help without technology in other domains. So what I'll argue today is actually very specifically on technology, not just on climate as a whole. And I've already written up here so that you know, what's coming? Is that a yes? Computer computers use energy. But they use a particular kind of energy electricity, which is of all the energy sources, the one that is easiest to make sustainable. And it's first of all a good thing. And it's actually important to realize that and keep it in the back of your head while you're thinking about the overall climate question. Secondly, it is actually true that we use quite a significant amount of energy. We'll talk about how much in particular after about half of this lecture, and we should think about what we can do to make sure that that doesn't become a problem, or it isn't the problem. And I will argue that it actually is okay at its current level. But what we should be trying to do is to ensure that the overall use of resources of computers does not grow. We don't I don't think we have to push it down to zero. But we have to make sure that as technology grows, it, we don't have exponential growth in use of of energy. And third, I also think that AI in particular machine learning actually have something to contribute beyond how much energy we use to the question of climate change. Okay, so let's get going. By the way I should say this is of course a topic that is on everyone's Mind. So everyone has a strong opinion on it probably. So if you feel like you want to ask a question, or she discussed and please raise your hand or write something in the chat that someone is probably already done. Someone said, I should talk more about projects and exam requirements. I will talk about the project at the end of the lecture. Okay, the last 15 minutes of the lecture will be dedicated to the project. And yeah, so please do ask questions. This is really something that we should have a dialogue on, of course, it's a lecture. So it's, you know, it's me talking. But, you know, if you want me, I'm very happy to discuss some of these aspects. Also, because it's not hard science. Actually, it is, I'm trying to be as hard science as possible, as you will notice. But it's such a complicated large scale system, such a such a, like, complex system, that it's actually very difficult to just come to one conclusion and say, That's the solution we should follow. So, first of all, since this is, of course, a little fishy, let's start with some data to like, get ourselves settled, it is a problem, right? So this is some data set that you can find online, it's collected by various people at the NOAA, which I always forget what this abbreviation is for, it's a northern North American organization for some, I think, is basically a metrological organization that collects data. This is a CSV file, I downloaded this, he measured co2 content in the atmosphere over the last 800,000 years as collected from ice cores in Antarctica. And you can see that so something has happened. And it's pretty clearly something to do with humans. And what maybe, but what I find concerning about this plot, actually, beyond the fact that we know that co2 heats, the atmosphere is the act of absolute numbers here. So all of human culture, reading, writing, mathematics, philosophy, they all happened in like the last tick mark on this axis, right. So for basically the entire duration of mankind, as we know it today, like not apes, somewhere on on trees, but actual humans, happened at a range of about 200 parts per million in co2. And then there's this natural cycle here. So this one actually is probably not our fault, right? This this rise. But then we've since basically doubled the co2 content in the atmosphere, as you now know, thanks to Corona, there is an increase in co2 in the atmosphere lack in this room actually is associated with a reduction in mental capacity, right in concentration abilities. And you may have heard like that this was like the all the co2 traffic lights now in classrooms that beyond 500, cognitive abilities begin to decline, and around 1000 parts per million people just become, it's really hard to concentrate. So what we what we seem to be doing here is actually just among other things, make ourselves number by putting co2 in the atmosphere, that alone should be something to be concerned about, let alone the fact that it actually affects the climate. So what should we do about this? So first thing that is that I find that interesting piece of information for the thought process is that yes, of course, emissions have something to do with industrial activity with human economic activity. This is a plot of the co2 content, no co2 emissions per capita of different countries over the past, what, 200 300 years. And so the thick red line is Germany, the thick black line is the world and there's some other countries underneath. Interesting point to note here is that we're probably around the point now where we are overtaking China on our way down as they are on their way up. But that's really just a bit of a magic number. And this, this plot is supposed to signify and I think this is something that that many people have kind of emotionally an opinion about, that. What we experiencing here is essentially kind of a, like maybe a punishment for our sins, right of capitalism, and Industrialism and building things. That's probably true. Right? This was clearly the submissions are caused. And we'll get to that in a moment by industrial activity. And that may mean at feet at first, if you just look at this plot, that the goal, the goal should be to go back right to stop economic activity and return to essentially, you know, the 18 hundred's roughly or unless you're in Britain, and maybe the 1750s. However, in the past 30 years or so it's actually maybe in some countries, at least in Germany is one of them, we've actually managed to decouple economic growth from co2 emissions. So in Germany over the last 30 years, co2 emissions have slowly but they have declined and they don't decline as fast as they should, for the IPCC goals, but they are declining and all While GDP has been growing, so this is actually a message I'm trying to, like use to lead into our conversation about technology afterwards, that it's not fundamentally the case that technology drives emissions, it is possible to advance technology and advanced economic growth while reducing emissions. And that is actually, if you think about it, a very powerful observation. Of course, you can still afterwards for other reasons, argue that, you know, we should somehow change our lifestyle. But in principle, it's not technically impossible to have a continued economic development associated with a decrease in co2 emissions. So where do we actually produce co2 now? At the moment, yes, the question or comment? externalizing co2 emissions. So there's a good point. And so China has maybe your data point on that. That is true. There are. So this plot alone is probably not enough to argue the case sort of convincingly. And we'll get to projects at the end of the lecture, maybe one interesting question could be to try and answer the question a little bit more in detail. So there are countries that are taking on labor from us that have grown at decreasing co2 emissions, India is one of them should look at the blue line. It's not not a lot, because India overall is a difficult data set to us, because it's such a heterogeneous country, but it is at least possible. We're also Yeah, I mean, okay, so maybe it is true that the world is just offloading all of its production to China. And that's producing the co2 There, there are corresponding data sets, actually. So this data, by the way, comes from our world and data, like a significant part of the data that I'm using here, not all of it, there is a data set there that has a co2 footprint, I have that here. Actually, this is this is consumption based. So this black line is the so called consumption based co2 emission, which is trying to compute the offset for products that are being imported. So, but I recommend reading up on exactly how to do that. Because of course, there's a lot hidden behind that. And this is actually a very good point to move to the next slide. So where is this you to actually produce, we need to understand what makes you to like what which processes of our life produce you to, to decide what we should do. And so I try to find a simple chart online that just says this is how this is this is all the parts of human activity that produce co2. And of course, you can find those. And it turns out, if you find three of them, you get four different opinions on what's actually true. And I'll show you one in a moment. But before I show it to you, I want to like explicitly stress that. And it's actually not surprising if you think about it. Because now with the what are called the 2030 goals, the IPCC goals, a lot of political questions are writing on what exactly we call an emission and how we calculate what they are, right? So different countries now have to provide to the UN a list of their co2 emissions. And of course, it's in everyone's interest to cap the categories such that it looks good for them. And so I found one set of data that I'm going to show you, it's the top part of this waterfall plot that comes from the World Resources Institute. This is a not for profit, as far as I understand that is associated with the IPCC, but not directly, and they provide a global dataset of co2 emissions from different sectors. And I had to read up exactly what their sectors are, and how what they like, how do they how do they find their sectors, and it's actually was very confusing. It's I spent basically a day on this chart. And there's a court there's another data set, which you can also download from one of your projects, if you like, from the world by now. It's actually as of this November, the BMV, the Federal Ministry for economics and climate change, because the Ministry for Environmental Affairs has been real realigned, right so that Minister habeck is now in charge of climate. And they provide a different offset for a different calculation for how Germany produces co2, and it's completely different categories. So this fits into the narrative of this lecture over all that sometimes the hardest part with of working with data is to get the data in the first place. And we're certainly at a point in time when humanity doesn't actually know who is producing co2 Where and for which purpose for which purposes. So you should think you should imagine in your head for each of these categories, a very big arrow bar. But the overall orders of magnitude are probably reasonable. So where do we produce you to produces, if we use it for running our buildings, commercial and residential. And this is already a first category is a bit problematic, because what exactly is in this category turns out is basically everything a building does. So what we are currently doing here, these lights, my computer, and yours, those are also in that category. And office computers and so on are also in there, you're eating at home as well. Then there is industrial, so those together, right, something like 17% industrial production is another chunk of similar size 20 odd percent. So that's basically making stuff in China and elsewhere. And then there are fugitive gases from energy production. So that's when you make electricity with coal and gas. And some of it gets lost in the process, typically right at the front. So you know, these pictures of big gas flare somewhere in the Siberian snippet, those are in there, then there is cement. So cement is actually a very significant part of co2 production in the world, people disagree on how much it is, it might also be 11%. So I don't know, does it I don't think there are any chemists in here. But the process of making cement, very fundamentally amounts to producing co2 is basically burning something but very slowly, right? It's an oxygen, oxygen isolation. Okay, I'm not a chemist, but it just produces co2. So cement is a bad thing. There are other petrochemical processes that happen, you know, like APIs F in Lubich, saffron, that also make co2, just as a fundamental part of the chemical process that cannot be avoided, right, it just produce co2. And then there is transport, which we all know and have heard a lot about a lot, road, air, rail, and ship traffic, some of those sometimes get collected under bunker fuels, that's aviation and shipping because they are collected in big tanks. And then there's agriculture, which is 20 odd percent. And and waste, where waste does not mean incineration of waste, that's actually in the first category because it's used to make energy. It means the the the digestion processes of micro organisms that eat our waste, both the wastewater and solid waste, which is basically half a half each, actually. So it's one and a half percent for wastewater and one and a half percent for the other side. So if we and by the way, so here's the one for Germany, from the, from the actually, this is from the same site. And annoyingly for Germany, there is no separation between transportation, electricity and heat, they come in the same category. So you should imagine the orange and the red bar together. And it's kind of makes sense, right? So in Germany, the relative size of agricultural activity relative to production is smaller, because Germany is an industrial nation. Okay. But other than that is a valid certificate, similar kind of breakdown. So if we want to reduce our footprint by something like 90%, at least, right, that's kind of the order of magnitude we are looking for. And clearly, we have to reduce all of these, because there is nothing in there that we can have that we can just leave as is and still hope for a 90% reduction. So all of these have to be reduced that they are very different categories. So the first main thing I want to get across that the first but one main message I want to get across in this section of the lecture is that these different categories, these different sectors that produce you two are qualitatively different in how they produce you. So let's pick out every Okay, so maybe maybe chemical processing is particularly easy to think about, there's just no other way to make cement, if you're making cement, it produces co2, because that's what cement like the process, the chemical process of making cement is like that. So if you want to avoid it, you have to avoid cement. There's no way of making a co2 neutral cement. Similarly, there are chemicals that we need for our way of life that just produce co2 When they are produced. So we have to be placed them if you want to get rid of them on a fundamental chemical level, right? It's not just you know, like some minor tweak that is somehow some micro biological change, right, but we actually have to change how we make them. Now for electricity and heat, and transportation, arguably, we have solutions. We have ways of making electricity that are sustainable. And we have made ways of making everything that's not electric electric. So you can heat your building with a heat pump. Actually, you can heat your building also with solar ceramics on the on the roof. You don't have to burn fossil fuels. You can build electric cars, and run them on batteries. You don't have to burn fossil fuels. Now doing that it's not for free. It's not like it just magically happens. But it's actually possible. So in these sectors in the red and the orange one, we can actually talk about basically solving the problem in a way that the end consumer doesn't have to think about. So maybe one of the messages you've also maybe noticed over the last five years or so, that the course of the discussion about this pollution for climate change has really changed in that it used to be people, people ask the consumer to change their behavior of it all. If all we all just unplugged our phone chargers, then no this kind of solution. And it's now become clear, I think Corona has really made it clear that it's there's no use in waiting for the general public to solve a problem in like, in a concerted way, right? It's never going to happen that all we all together decide to solve a problem by changing our behavior. Instead, we need solutions that are basically government government mandated somehow, they are still going to affect our life as consumers, because they'll change our behavior, but they'll change it in a more or less forced way. So for electricity and heat, it's actually possible to do this, in particular for electricity in a way that the end user doesn't even notice. Right? The power that comes out of this plug is the same whether it's produced by a coal plant, or photovoltaics, you don't even notice. And you can already guess I'm going to come back to this and argue that computers are particularly interesting in this regard, because they all run on electricity. So we can make the computers sustainable by making electricity production sustainable. But there are other sectors. And actually, so let me let me show you one, two more slides to bring this home. This is actually already happening. This is the good news. So on the left, you see this is all for Germany, or in this case, it's definitely several different countries. These are this data for Germany for our production of co2 or emissions from co2 for the production of energy over the last, well, 200 years. And you can see that so what most of it initially was just cold because that would that was around in Germany. Now we also have oil and gas gas is like the more recent solution. You know, the gas is a big political issue at the moment, right this week. Actually, there's a lot of discussion about it. Because Germany's arguing with the European Union, that gas should be classified as a sustainable energy source, which of course, maybe isn't. And on the other hand, nuclear energy, according to Germany should not be classified as sustainable and the French disagree exactly on these two points. Now. So but what we can already see is that coal is actually declining. In Germany, it's not declining as fast as you'd like to, but it does. And oil is hard to see in this plot, but it's relatively constant. But gas is essentially growing at the moment. But our overall emissions from fossil fuel burning actually are going down. On the other hand, production from renewables has grown. And interestingly, I think, at least I find interesting in this that like, hydro has always stayed the same in Germany, basically. And this seems to be an aspect of hydropower. That is, it's just not something you can expand, right? You can build dams in rivers. And once you've handled the rivers, that's it, there's no more water, right, every country has an amount of water available, they can use, and Norway has a lot. That's why Norway is not on this plot. Because if I would, if I would put nobody on this plot, it would just be up there at 100%. And it would mess up the axes. But for Germany, with 80 million people and a bunch of small rivers, it's not actually possible to make that much hydro power, but we have an increasing amount of wind, and solar, that is now actually allowed us to reach something like we're approaching 50% of our power production, electricity, sorry, electricity production, from renewables. This is just electricity, right? Not all of energy. But nevertheless, I think that's a relatively good course. And you can see here on some other countries on this, on this map, you can see the basically everyone in the industrialized world is beginning to expand their sustainable or renewable energy production. And the UK is kind of competing with that with us, at least this group, kind of for the top spot, and you can see China and sorry, France down here. And so that's because they've been a very significant part of their electricity production on nuclear plants. So much so that if he would count nuclear plants in here, that would be very, very high up. That's what the political discussion is about at the moment between Paris and Berlin, right? Whether whether the French should be allowed to say, we're good, right? Because we have all this nuclear power over the Germans should be allowed to say all we can use gas for a while because it's kind of sustainable, right? So why are we doing that? But actually, there's a very interesting other data point to add to this, since you're in data literacy, guys, this is a crude plot from our world in data, but Max rows are literally just copy pasted, which shows as a function of the installed capacity on the x axis, the price of different sources of electricity over time. And it's so some of you may have seen this before right. So, what this plot basically shows is that over the last 10 years also from 20, this affair is 2010 to 2019. The price of in particular photovoltaic electricity generation has dropped extremely. And similarly the price of wind has gone down While at the same time the price of nuclear power has risen. The price of gas and coal gasses on India but it's actually similar, are basically constant. So I think behind this plot hidden behind this plot is an answer to why our politicians act the way they do. It's basically a bet that we as a nation take at the moment that we are going to be able to build a sustainable industry completely based on renewable energy. And that maybe in you know, 10 years time, all the other countries are going to come asking us for our technology, because we know how to build you know, solar and wind. But we just need a little bit of time to get through that. So in the meantime, we'd like to get basically a lease from the European Union to run some gas, that seems to be what the argument is pointing down to. So this is actually really good news, because it means that at the moment, solar power is about a 20%, the cost, it used to be 10, just 10 years ago. So if you now go back and think about these categories, again, like let's say we're now so according to this plot, we currently produce roughly like half of our electricity from renewables. So if you think of, like how much of this actually is electricity, it's probably like 80% or so the rest being heat. Now, if half of that is already renewable, and then we have to just just quote unquote, add the cars and get the other part of the red bar green as well, maybe we have to, you know, build four times as much renewable energy as we currently have. That seems totally feasible. If you just look outside and look at what the landscape looks like, there's still some space for four times as much wind, wind power, and it's gonna cost us less than what we've already invested. Because 10 years ago, when most of the stuff that's currently out in the countryside was built, this stuff was actually five times more expensive. So that's the good news. But just to compare that to finish the argument on why we should think of electricity as not much of a problem, let's think of some of these other sectors, in particular, let's think of agriculture. So I'm not going to try and bash agriculture, of course, we all eat, right, it also makes sense that our production of stuff takes about as much energy as the production of stuff we eat. But agriculture is actually a sector that is much much harder to make sustainable, why because it is another plot from our world in data. The this this shows per kilogram of of produce, which is very important for food, because kilogram is a very awkward unit for food. But how much of the energy footprint the energy movement is for each different like category, and how much of it is actually from like the electrical and heat, electricity and heat section. So in particular, there is processing, transport and retail. And you can see that the transport part, this kind of pinkish bit is basically invisible in all of these different categories. So if you're trying to reduce your co2 footprint by buying local produce, it's not going to help not going to work at all, right, it basically has no effect. So the stuff that makes you to in beef, meat is just the cow itself. It's this big chunk here, that it's labeled farm. That's actually the methane, which is we computed here into equivalent co2 emissions of methane produced by the digestion of the animal. So basically, all ruminating animals or video Koya, like cows, and sheep, and goats. Annoyingly, those are exactly the animals that make cheese. And they're a significant part of our meat production. They all produce methane as part of the chemical processes in their guts. So if you want to get rid of that, you have to get rid of the animal, there is no way to make the process sustainable. So the solution for ad for farming will have to be somehow that people eat less meat, or that they eat less dairy products actually. And if you've seen what we've all we've all together, lift to the last two years of Corona, you can probably imagine that it's going to be very hard to convince the average consumer to just stop eating, basically start eating vegan more or less or eat like a plant based diet. So I am lucky, I'm happy that I'm not in St. Mary's shoes, some are having to argue with the public that they should all stop eating meat and actually also cheese. So either way, if you like that this is obviously a little bit orthogonal to our topic of computer science. But I very much recommend that you play with this website actually a bit. It's really beautiful thinking about how to change your diet suddenly becomes a really complicated issue actually. So but the main point I want to get across with this kind of intermediate black slide is that our are at the moment the way we produce co2 and actually equivalent gases or methane and nitrous nitrogen oxide are basically split between energy and heat, Agriculture, Transportation and Some things that are very hard to get rid of chemical processes and waste digestion. So if we want to fix those, we have to reduce all of them, we don't get around reducing our footprint. But for some of these sectors, it's actually possible to do it in a relatively straightforward way. And conveniently, the one sector that has the biggest effect at the moment is the one that is easiest to make sustainable. We just quote unquote, have to turn all the cars into electric cars, we have to build better batteries. And we have to just put photovoltaics and wind everywhere, more or less well, not everywhere, we have to put four times as much as we already have. Which seems feasible and actually doing that will be cheaper than what we've already invested. It's not a financial question, because this stuff has just become much cheaper. But there are other sectors that are much harder to make sustainable. And that's why I'm going to argue in the remainder of this of this lecture, that when we talk about the co2 emissions from electrical devices, digital devices, computers, if you have to keep that, in the back of our minds, that energy consumption from a computer is, in some ways, a little bit less problematic than energy consumption, from a car or from food, because they are easier to make sustainable. That doesn't mean that we are free to use as much electricity as we want. But we can maybe think about it on a sort of slightly different grid. In particular, everything that's already electric, will more or less automatically become sustainable. I know that's a dangerous thing to say, right? Simply because the market forces are going to make sure that there will be more and more sustainable power production, simply because it's cheaper, as long as the politicians make the regulatory processes such that it actually happens, right. So that, you know, people can't just make it impossible to build wind power somewhere. The one thing we have to make sure, though, of course, is that the the sectors that use electricity don't grow faster than we can build sustainable power. And given that we are in a sector that sometimes grows exponentially, and particularly at the moment baby grows very rapidly, we actually have to make sure that that doesn't become a problem. So my goal, my argument, the base of the argument for the remainder of the of the lecture will be the goal should not be to find computers that don't use energy. But the goal should be to make sure that as computers keep being used, more and more, their energy footprint does not grow, it stays roughly the same. Okay, and why do we have to talk about that? Well, because people disagree on this, there's actually a significant chunk of society that I think is at the moment, arguing that computers are a kind of a significant part of the original sin that we should somehow digital ecology is evil, and we should get rid of it. Maybe that's true, but it's maybe not so important for the climate question. So I'm going to show you some of some quotes, and they are largely in German. But so if you can't read them, I'll try and translate themselves the important bits, it's also not so super important for what's to come. I just want to get this across that there is actually a and I think this is a symptom of the way that we as a society are discussing the climate issue at the moment that it's often broken up similar to how I started the course by saying, you know, statistics is often provided as a laundry list of all these different things, you should be worried about all these tests and, and methods to use. Similarly, the climate question is often broken down by the media into these incredibly small bits, and how we should all you know, unplug our phone chargers and switch off our our, our televisions and decide to I don't know, a buy certain kinds of local produce, as opposed to bananas that come from somewhere far, this just makes the discussion so complicated, that a large part of the population is just shut off by now. But it seems like everything is just unsustainable, and we're just we're just doomed. But actually, but in my opinion, I don't think we're doomed. I think we actually have ways out of this problem. We just have to figure out as a society, how to think about them. And that's really a data literacy question, how to how to provide the answers in a way that people can actually have a discussion about them. So here are some examples of how I personally say we should not be thinking about them. This is a piece from the Tagesspiegel, one of the major newspapers in Germany from late 2019 pre Crona, arguing that okay, according to some not for profit that the whole sector of information and communication technology produces around 4% of all greenhouse gas emissions worldwide, which is twice as much as air travel, and 47 billion kilowatt hours What a nasty way of using units are used. In Germany alone, buy electric devices, or digital devices, which include TVs, as well as data centers, data centers alone you will 13 point 2 billion kilowatt hours and therefore the use as much as 30. So there's a lot of weird comparisons in there. This is very typical for the for the way that these kind of numbers are presented in the media. So first of all, okay, units are silly, like, what? Why not just talk about megawatt hours talking about hours, okay, but fine. But this comparison between on the one that's often a mix up between electricity and all of co2 production, it kind of happens with between sentences, we switch between all co2 emissions, and just electricity. And we now know that it's actually a very small world. It's a non trivial, but it's a fraction of the overall right, it's like a fifth roughly, or maybe, maybe more like a third. And then there are these comparisons between different entities that have very different sizes. So all of Germany for its digital devices, uses as much electricity as Berlin, uses electricity. What does this tell me? Right? Not sure what to make of that number. And then also, you may have heard of this before, I'll come back to this example, training, just one AI because for public, of course, it's just an API for natural language processing uses five times as much co2 as a car during its entire lifetime. I'll get back to that. I'm sure many of you have seen that example before. I'll actually do a proper computation on that. And then this article actually goes on to say, 80% of all the traffic on the internet, also, suddenly, we're not talking about TVs anymore. Right now, we're just talking about 80% of the use of the Internet, currently are used for streaming videos. Again, if you think about it, it's not surprising, right? I mean, what do you do with the internet that actually uses data bandwidth? It's streaming videos, right? 80% of it is streaming videos. And that apparently produces as much co2 emissions as all of Spain, another weird comparison between the whole world and Spain 45% of it is, is the producers and 55 is the is the consumption assumption. That's actually an interesting data point, we'll come back to that, it is true that roughly half of the energy consumption for getting something from the internet is the bit that that's not you. Right, so it's your computer, and then the Internet uses for you basically another computer. So whatever, if you watch a 10 minute YouTube video, at high end, at high resolution, you're basically using as much energy as running an oven for like half as long. And particularly if you use high resolution data, so data you're gonna check from the Green Party A is in the is the representative of Munich in the federal parliament, says that, because of this, YouTube should be forced to stream in low resolution. So I actually I have to say, I have to defend misiak A little bit, I was on a podium with him once. And actually, I can't imagine he actually said that maybe he was misunderstood, because he actually knows a lot more about this stuff than me, he was just really badly quoted, not sure. Or they maybe they asked him the wrong, wrong point in the day, and he just wanted to say something quick. But this is one of these examples of where the entire huge complicated problem gets boiled down into this annoying message to the consumer. It's like, so how are we going to solve the climate problem? Or you have to watch low resolution YouTube videos, that this is not actually I mean, even if it's nominally true on a numbers level, even if the numbers are correct, it's not a meaningful signal to send to the consumer. And also, I would imagine that most people disagree actually, right the most people just want to have their HD television, or their YouTube channels. We all know that it just sucks to watch low resolution videos. So why does this number come from this? So here's another quote from another publication. This is more of a very political piece. It's actually a like a pamphlet called bits employment. downloaded online, it's free free as a PDF. It's actually interesting read from, I think, is a preceding summer workshop that also quotes this number that 33 million tonnes of co2 are produced per annum for well basically digital devices in Germany as much as the German air transport. So now, we're not talking about all flights anymore, only the German ones, which are the ones that produce less co2 Because basically co2 production is just a function of distance. Okay, still number two. So this comes from a publication that is cited down here, and by core Quran and Andre, which who these are economists who basically kind of tallied up how much energy the IT sector is using and here it again is basically all digital devices. So televisions, the projectors at the back of this room and so on. They together require electricity to about two kilowatt hour 2000 So two megawatt hours right per year. That seems we Ansari billion megawatt hours kilowatt hours, okay. So we are at 2 billion megawatt hours you do in your head, what that actually is with a proper unit, and that is if you compare that to the electricity consumption of other kind of entire countries, it's basically the third in line so that you can boil that down into this kind of kind of poster to put somewhere on next to a bus stop. If the internet were a country, it would you even have the third highest electricity consumption in the world. Again, this is true. And or I assume it's true. I haven't done the numbers myself. But it's also not too surprising, actually, if you do like a little sanity check in your head, because what are we using electricity for? Right? Are we using it to build stuff, they're using it to hopefully, well, at the moment, not so much drive our cars, we're using it sometimes to heat stuff, and then to chill stuff to wash stuff, and also to sit in front of our computers. So it's maybe not so surprising that a certain non trivial percentage of overall electricity is used for computers. Right? And it turns out, I mean, if you look at that plot, and kind of I integrated, try to figure out how much how much of it it is, it's kind of a meaningful percentage. So and by the way, our politicians have actually noticed as well, of course, in the current coalition contract that there are sentences on what to do how to make digitalization sustainable, I actually think those sentences are okay, right there, they actually kind of a meaningful thing to say, they're also relatively easy to do, right. So they say they want to have legislation that makes data centers sustainable. In Germany, largely, this is supposed to come from reusing the heat of computers, and putting them into centralized heating systems. And apparently, that's actually possible. I'm not like, we're trying to figure out how to do that, by the way with our compute Center here in the university. And it's a it's a bit of a sticky process, but apparently, it's actually possible. So what all of these numbers actually say is that computers use energy. And that is true. So what I'd like to do now someone, someone wrote in the chat, if the internet would be a country, it would have 3.9 billion inhabitants, maybe also another way of thinking about it. So what I'd like to do now is actually try for us to get a more quantitative view on how much power computers actually need. Keeping in the back of our heads, that they use electricity, and electricity is the one source of energy that is easiest to make sustainable. In fact, we're already doing it, right half of our electricity roughly, is already produced in a sustainable way. So let's start with a really bad use of electricity. For computers. It is true that computers use a very significant amount of power just to check that everyone's bitcoin wallet makes sense. So these are the you may have seen this numbers before. This is also data, you can download real time on the internet from the Cambridge Bitcoin electricity consumption index. This is a website run by a group of economists actually in Cambridge, who have a model to compute from the numbers that are publicly available about the Bitcoin Blockchain, how much energy, the energy, not co2 might how much energy the miners probably use to, to to verify the digital the distributed ledger, and they you can see that it has error bars, because it's actually very difficult to get that right, because the process is so complicated. But you know, typically, this probably means that at the moment, the Bitcoin Blockchain alone uses something like maybe 100, or 90 terawatt hours. And here is a comparison that I think is a bit more useful. This is something that the New York Times did a while ago, at seven times as much as Google. And that does seem like a very wasteful use of technology, in my opinion. So basically, what these people do, or what these devices will do, is kind of the digital equivalent of people walking through the street constantly checking that their, that their purse is still there, right, it's still corrected, they haven't lost some money in the process. And that this process takes seven times as much as this huge company that provides so much more services doesn't seem efficient. So something will have to happen about these cryptocurrencies to make them more energy efficient. I'm not I don't know anything properly about cryptocurrencies. So I really shouldn't be commenting on the I just know that this number is too high. And it's so there are areas in digital technology that are just silly, in their use of, of resources, and we have to do something about them one way or another. So let's break this down into some numbers that we can actually compare. So what kind of what kind of sources are consumers of energy do we have to think about when we think of computers, there are basically four things and you can split them into two parts, the computation that you don't see that happens outside of your room in the internet, the cloud and the computation that happens so that you can see it on your desk or in the cell on the on the internet thing that's a really nice number to to actually use. I got this from the corporate social responsibility report of T calm Germany's largest provider of digital Services. Click on there says actually, it seems pretty reliable source, they have an external auditor that goes with them through them, you can download the numbers. They even have CSV files for download relatively decent website. They report that they use 120 kilowatt hours per terabyte. So for 120 Watt hours per gigabyte, of stuff they send to you as the end consumer for all their power use. So that includes the box outside of your home, where the where the cable comes out. And it includes the data center somewhere and everything else, the backbones and so on. And we'll, we'll have to think about how much that is, right? That that's just a number, okay, is this a large number or a small number we'll see. So let's compare that to the devices you all have. There are basically three different ones, right? The mobile ones, the semi mobile ones on your desk, and the big beefy ones in the salary that you use to do your research, or maybe just to play computer games. The So here, I'm trying to like break it down to some reasonable simple numbers we can work with. So I tried to get some numbers for all types of devices. I didn't want to like go through a complicated study and like, collecting lots and lots of numbers. So I just used the most recent beefiest kind of computers I could find for the different categories. So the newest iPhone, has a battery that has something like 17 Watt hours of, of capacity took me a bit of time to figure out what kind of voltage it has. And so what did that what does that mean in terms of power consumption? Well, okay, if you very roughly say, for the average user, the phone lasts a day before you have to recharge it, it's probably a pretty pessimistic view, I think for most people, it lasts a little bit longer than that, if you have half your battery left at the end of the day, then that means the average power consumption, you can divide this by 24. But it's something like one watt or less. Which is, you know, another comparison you could make is like two LED lights, typically more than that, a typical desktop computer. So the new, the new MacBook Pro that just recently came out, nobody has it yet, because it can't be bought as 100 Watt hours of battery capacity. And people have done measurements with it. To figure out how much power it draws, it depends a lot on what you do with it. If it just sits idle like and just show something without doing much, then it draws something like four watts. And if you put it on a benchmark, and just make it run as hard as you possibly can, it was about 110 watts. This also makes sense, I think, because the new power block from Apple that comes with these devices is 120 Watts, they had to make a new one because they draw so much power. So that probably gives an upper bound on how much these devices can actually draw, so that you can plug them in without the battery eventually just going down. And finally, GPUs, the big things we use for machine learning, they actually do a more so a single Nvidia v 100. GPU, the ones we use for research, draw something like 250 watts. And typically people build workstations out of them with maybe eight in them. And then actually, in practice, the ones that we have in the media for most of us up on the hill, in our in our basement, draw something like two kilowatts if they actually run for research. So that is roughly eight times the 250. And of course, there's some other stuff in those devices, those machines that also draws power, but actually it's very hard to get the GPU to run at 100% all the time, people who try to do that figure quickly notice that it doesn't really work. So we typically get see something like two kilowatts being drawn while people are doing research. And we have a pipe from the start value that goes into our building up on the Hill that can provide 300 kilowatts, just for compute, actually, and the university is in the process of building a getting planning, planning permission to build a new data center here on the mortgage data that will have power capacity coming in from the setback of 1.2 megawatts, and the start back will have to build its own power plant just to run it. So it's not It's not trivial, right? It's not something we can just dismiss, we actually have to think about how much power we use for this. But we have to compare it with meaningful other like units. So overall German electricity consumption is in 2020. I got that from the public, statistical Buddha's. And it's 573.6 terawatt hours, which if you divided by the number of hours in a year, and the number of people in Germany is something like 800 watts. So all of us constantly 24 hours a day on average, draw 800 watts. Sometimes, it's less sometimes it's more sometimes it's just our fridge in the communal, communal kitchen. That is they may be drawing more than it should because it's completely icy. Sometimes it's your gaming machine. And some people of course, use more sometimes some people use less. So what does that actually mean for our processes of you know, our our daily life, how much of it Much of our electricity consumption is produced by different kinds of stuff we do with computers. And how do we how do they relate to other activities we do. So one of the hopes that I teach that at the beginning, is that sometimes digital technology can actually help reduce co2 footprint by replacing certain things that were previously processes that happen in the real world, and become more virtual or digital now, one example of that is virtual meetings. And I mean, two years ago, everyone would have said, Yeah, but you can't do everything on Zoom, that now we know, you can actually do a lot of things on Zoom. So I tried to get some numbers for how much power zoom actually uses. And so numbers that I've found people have actually done benchmarks is that the I mean, many of you are now on a zoom call as well, right. So you are currently in a group called group calls use more bandwidth than one to one calls. Apparently, if you have a high resolution, which maybe we shouldn't be doing. But we all like to use high resolution video, then as zoom uses about 2.4 gigabytes per hour and per participant, which is actually quite a lot, right. But you know, we have to send images of ourselves around the internet. So we'll use the number that we got on the previous slide from Te COMM For how much energy they need to do this kind of transfer of data. And we know that that's point one, two kilowatt hours per gigabyte, or 120 Watt hours per gigabyte, or 120 kilowatt hours per terabyte, times 2.4 gigabyte hours per gigabyte per hour in participants, that's the energy consumption of the pipe of getting data in and out. And then of course, you have your own laptop sitting there, or maybe you're on a desktop machine. And I'll be very, very pessimistic in my assumption, and say, this device that this that the people watching on our is sitting on draws 100 Watts, which is a lot, actually. Right. So it really, really depends on I mean, I've seen a lot of people in zoom calls now, right, if you're on a laptop, like many of you probably are, you're probably drawing more, something more like 20 Watts just to get all this data in. But if you are, you know, in a nice office with a big screen, and then that speed alone maybe draws 80 Watts, or if you're on a desktop computer that has a GPU that is kind of producing all this doing all this nice stuff for zoom that, let's say 100 Words, then that means the Zoom call will need open for kilowatt hours per hour and participant. Maybe in your head, you already want to cancel out the hours, that will mean that you know you need 400 Watts constantly to sit there. But actually, let's leave the hour in because it's going to be useful later on. So but we don't do digital meetings, because we've decided we now want to spend our time in digital meetings, we do them because we are not meeting people anymore, right? So instead of going somewhere to meet, we are meeting digitally. So if you would go somewhere that would produce co2 as well, typically, if we need resources. So what are those resources depends on how you go somewhere, right. And of course, people use Zoom to replace conferences overseas, or to be placed, you know, commit committee meetings, and you're in a university where everyone is interviewed. So you could get from place A to place B by cycling, maybe in an arguably you're not producing co2 Apart from your normal breathing, you could use a car you could use, you could fly somewhere, you could take a train. And actually, it turns out, all of these are relatively similar to each other in terms of how much energy they need. So a typical car with an internal combustion engine needs something like five litres, 200 kilometers per passenger, maybe I mean, if you're traveling alone, or if you're traveling with two people in a big card, and maybe it's still kind of roughly roughly true. And that actually comes up to about 50 kilowatt hours per kilometer and passenger. This is a very nice convenient facts that are basically all hydrocarbons. So that includes butter, and you know heavy oil and gasoline and jet fuel. If you want to get from the volume to the energy, you can roughly multiply by 10 and then get kilowatt hours instead of liters. It's plus or minus, you know, 20% depending on what kind of fuel you're talking about, but it's roughly two. You can also translate it into co2, if it's an internal combustion engine by multiplying by 2.3. It's another nice rule of thumb, if you want to know what your footprint of your car is beyond the car itself, and you bought it. Every time you go to the pump and you fill up, you've just read off how many liters you had multiply by 2.3. And you get the amount of kilograms of co2 You've produced with that with that fuel. It's simple chemistry, right? You just like you burn stuff. There's basic, I mean, very roughly speaking, there is a carbon atom that gets added to oxygen atoms that come from the atmosphere. And that's why there's the 2.3 roughly right because oxygen is lighter than carbon. And roughly afterwards you have three times as much as before in terms of atoms. But the two atoms that come in are lighter. Okay, so trains are a little bit more efficient. Actually, airplanes are roughly the same, you may have heard that airplanes use four liters per 100 kilometers and passenger. So that's, you know, within the same range, it's just two, airplanes basically just produce so much co2 Because they go so far, not because they're so inefficient. They're just you people take airplanes to get really far. And that makes for a big footprint. And annoyingly, of course, airplanes are one of those categories that aren't easy to make sustainable, because there's basically no solution that doesn't produce co2. So trains are actually more efficient, there's a very nice thing about trains that they so quickly tell you, because it's a really nice story. And I'm originally a physicist, so I can't keep myself from talking about this. But to get them something from A to B, if you do it at speed higher than, you know, 2020 kilometers an hour. And basically, the friction with the ground doesn't matter, it's just air friction. So to get something from A to B at high speed, what you have to do is you basically can imagine a big tunnel of air that you have to travel through, and you have to take the mass of all that air and move it out of the way to get through. Now, that means that the energy you need to do that, basically is now linearly dependent on how many people you pack behind that frontal area of the of the thing that transports them. And cars are bad with that, because you typically pick one person behind, like, you know, the frontal area of a car. And trains are really good at it, because they have roughly the same frontal area as a car, but you may have 200 or 1000 people behind you. So that's actually really efficient. So trains, however, it is also very heavy, so doesn't have that. Okay, so trains need something like two kilowatt hours rather than 50. That's pretty good, if they are fully load. So now, if you're a physicist, not all of you aren't, but you've kind of got used to maybe to just not actually coming up with a formula, but just looking at the unit's and just multiplying them such that it all works out. And then it's the right computation. So if you just rearrange the numbers correctly, then you'll find that I'm driving to if you compare the energy consumption of the Zune call 4.4 kilowatt hours per hour and participant with the energy consumption of driving somewhere with a car or with a train or car here being roughly equivalent to two airplanes, you get something like eight kilometers per hour, and 20 kilometers per hour in a tree. So that means if you have to decide whether you want to have that Zoom Call, or go somewhere to meet someone leaving a Corona aside for the moment, then you can say, Well, how long is the car going to be one hour, okay, then the amount of electricity I'll need corresponds to the energy consumption of a car, that would take me to a meeting four kilometres away and back. So a one hour meeting on Zoom could be replaced by every participant in tubing and maybe traveling to one committee meeting by car. However, two caveats, the car typically burns fossil fuel, and produces co2. So if your Zoom meeting is happening with devices that are plugged in here on the university to university exclusively by sustainable electricity, and so we are on Cusco, then actually, you should never Trump right, take your bicycle, that's the one thing you could do, I don't take a car. Unless it's an electric car, also charged with renewable energy, then maybe you can go eight kilometers, or 20 by train. So the conference has to be quite long. If he was purely based on co2 footprint, you would travel somewhere by plane right across the Atlantic, for example, for it to make sense, purely in terms of footprint. So here's just an example of Oh, and by the way, if you go to that meeting, don't bring your laptop, right? Because then the whole meters hold that whole computation doesn't make sense anymore, right, you have to subtract those 100 Watts there. So this is an example where digital technology actually reduces the carbon footprint of an activity that would otherwise have to be physical. And there are other such examples where it's a good thing to have digital technology, because it allows you to do things that would otherwise produce you to in a different way. So that's a good example. Let's talk about some bad examples. So I've already mentioned this before, this is an article that came out a while ago 2019. It was at a conference. I don't actually know what ACL stands for. It's a computer linguistics conference. If the annual computer linguistics conference, maybe it's the American one, I don't know, by these three authors, who which turned into this big media attention, right that training a single AI model. So AI apparently is bad, right? Why? Because this is a plot from this is from the MIT Tech review article, but it's data from the original paper that's like reprinted here. They looked at different like deep learning models over time. And notice that ever getting larger and larger and harder and harder to train. And so it's actually a real problem that you may have heard in other lectures that basically all of the advancement of deep learning is largely down to hardware advances. So we now have much bigger GPUs that draw more power, but we haven't actually become more efficient at using them. So this, they found this one stupid D large transformer model that was that did neural architecture search that he had to repeatedly train it over and over and over again. And they found that they used 656 megawatt hours of electricity to train this model, which is eight times as much no five times as much as the lifetime emissions of an average American car, including the manufacturer of the car itself. So if I wanted to make this sound like a small number, I could say, okay, so this is the kind of model that doesn't get trained every day. It's actually a very large scale effort by I think this was open AI. So it's probably a team of like, I don't know, 30 people, they live somewhere in California. So they drive everywhere by car, they probably took two years to build this and run this. So this means that something like 60 car years, went into training this model, aside from the actual electricity simply for people, you know, commuting in, how long does the average car last, I don't know, 10 years, maybe. So the average car, right, so that's like six cars. So basically, the associated emission of just the job of these people is comparable to the electricity that this all used. I can, there's a similar kind of number that we can confirm this or corroborate this information with data from our own research. So we had a paper A while ago, it was in it was just an ICML. Last year, that was a large scale benchmark that we did reasonably successful. That is maybe the largest project in terms of compute capacity that my research group has ever done. And we kept track of how much time we use GPUs for it was 20,000 CPU hours on our device, up on the top of the hill. And so that's about five megawatt hours of power consumption for the whole project that included several reruns, and so on. And so that lets you do images of that are just to remind everyone actually zero because the university buys, because, right, now, maybe that's a bit evil to compare it that way. Because we were using someone else's electricity, it's like we're living in a society. So if you're using the German energy mix, that means we produce two tonnes of co2. And with this with this kind of research project, this was the project of a PhD student with a master's student. And well, maybe I'm, I'm a co author on that paper as well. So maybe we can count three people or two, depending on how you want to think of this project. And so that means what in 2019, at least, when we did this research, we produce about two tonnes this year, it would be a little bit less, because you know, our curve keeps going down in terms of how much sustainable energy we're producing. So that sounds like a lot, and it is a lot, it's maybe something you should really consider doing or not doing. And we did, right, we had a lot thought of things. Why are we actually doing this project? Well, this was actually a project project to point out how inefficient optimization training methods for deep learning are. And it succeeded in that goal, which attracted quite a lot of attention to the community. So maybe it was worth producing tons of co2 for it. But if these people who wrote this paper actually would have flown to ICML, or to neurips, to the conference that they submitted to originally in Vancouver, then they those flights of those two students going there would have produced about five tons of co2. So that the carbon footprint of research in computer science is actually still dominated by the travel to conferences. And that's maybe it's a signal for how low the overall footprint of computers are, compared to all the other stuff we do all the time. So we shouldn't feel like we are guilty of everything that society does. At the same time, though, it's also it's not nothing to tons, right. So it's actually something we have to think about. So in the end, actually, these people who wanted to fly to the conference couldn't because of Corona. So they went on a like long zoom call, and that produced about 220 kilograms of co2. So at the end, actually, the production of co2 from the computer was worse. So this actually, nevertheless, to me, my opinion does point to a real problem with AI at the moment. Right now, our our methods are extremely inefficient. And it's just because we found that we could do cool things with computers, we've decided to just do them and accept whatever is necessary to do them. Here's an example. This is sort of I think, by my favorite recent example of the state of AI, there is a project called Big Science, and where I don't know something like 100 people also across the world are trying to retrain an open source version of GPT through these large language models. And this is a tweet that one of them did right around Christmas. So what you can see here are learning curves. And this is the state of deep learning research for large scale deep learning, right, they just retrain the model 100 times with minor variations in the training algorithm, they change the learning rate, we changed the batch size, it changed the optimizer, a do weird restarts, and all sorts of other arcane tricks that are not particularly mathematically motivated. So we do need to do something about how AI works, we do have to make it more efficient. And there are actual scientific questions that we need to address to fix this. But the nice thing about this is that those are also the fun questions there about how to get AI to work properly. This is also a process that is super annoying for humans right there, these 30 people. And he said, it's, it's hard, it's not fun to do this, right? People are even even humans hate it this way. You have to sit in front of your computer and stare at weights and biases or tensor board or whatever, and then change stuff and come back next day. And this is not how computers should work, we've come to know computers from other domains of computer science as reliable, reproducible devices in AI, suddenly, this has somehow flown out the window. So one thing you could do, as an individual to address the co2 footprint of AI, is to just work on this stuff. Work on better methods. This is my sticky invitation to a lecture course that's coming up in the winter turn on methods of machine learning Numerix numerical algorithms of machine learning, because in my opinion, the biggest part of our footprint as an AI community is this. If you can fix this, then that's a double win, right? It's more fun to use these, these algorithms if they are actually more reliable, and they are automatically more efficient. So typically, people do like 100 retrains to get your deep learning model to work. If you can cut that to one, or maybe one that takes twice as long as your original one, then that's your 90% reduction right there. So that's actually what we I think, in my opinion, should really be focusing Yes. Yes, so this is this yo. So for those in the call that the point from the audience is that this, I think there's even a term for this right for this, I don't know what it's called, like this rebound effect, that if you make technology more efficient, people just use it more. And then overall, you end up using the same amount of energy. So that's why I started with this long spiel about why it's maybe not such a big problem if our overall consumption stays relatively constant. So because if you're using electricity, if you're if you're part of a sector that uses electricity, and I think we can, you can accept a goal as a community of staying where we are in terms of consumption. So to allow growth by simultaneously reducing the the the power consumption of the individual operation, and allowing more operations to take place. Now, admittedly, I'm making it quite simple for myself here, right by just saying, We should just do that. Now, this is not an automatic process, there is no governing process, at least at the moment that automatically ensures that that's exactly what's going to happen. Maybe it's the fact that NVIDIA can't produce enough GPUs because of Bitcoin. And that kind of limits how much how much energy we can use. But it's probably true that we need some kind of external regulation, that just restricts the growth of energy use, and maybe, you know, like, co2 trading might be one of these processes, that the price of energy just keeps going up until everyone figures out how to use that energy. So I want to end this section of the of the actually, this is maybe the main lecture for those who were only here to for this lecture and not for the whole course, by, like on a positive note, I think, like, a question for you specifically. So maybe maybe the main takeaway so far is that since digital devices use electricity, they are arguably allowed to stay around, they shouldn't be shouldn't get rid of them. They shouldn't keep growing in electricity consumption, but they maybe are allowed to stay around. And if they are allowed to stay around, then maybe you as an individual could think about what you can do to help mitigate climate change. So it used to be that people would be like, you know, unplug your phone chargers and defrost your fridge. I think it's we're past that point now as a society where we can go in this direction, but there are very significant decisions that individual takes that actually affect what happens. And the main one that you may be you can you can take in your age, at this point in your career is to decide what you want to spend your career on. What kind of research topics you want to work on. Do you want to build another chatbot for someone you know to be place their customer care care center? Or do you want to do something they want to work for a company or do kind of research that actually helps make AI a better thing for society. So I already pointed out one thing you could do if you could actually do core research for machine learning to make it more efficient, and then hope that those gains in efficiency aren't offset completely by gains, or actually not, not yet, not just offset, but over offset by growth in use. But you could also use like going to an apply domain and use AI for, let's say, Good pacifically for the climate good. So just to provide a short laundry list of things, in case you're wondering what exactly that could be based on the stuff that we noticed so far. So first thing it's actually super important, is to get the data, right. So it's at the moment, a large part of the problem is that our society doesn't fully understand where co2 is produced, how it is produced by whom, and how it's translated back and forth through economies. So we need better data, actually, the politicians have noticed this, there's now a very large drive in the public sector, to provide better data and to create legislation to force companies to provide your data, the new coalition contract has a section on forcing public suppliers of electricity and public transport systems to provide open data, this kind of stuff is really important, and it will take experts like you, there are companies that do that, actually, I'm not going to say their names here in public, because I don't want to, you know, like, like to secret advertising for them. But if you want to know who that would be, let me know. So you could build better algorithms for controlling the electric grid, we currently have a collaboration going on our early conversations with the local one here in Germany, in the southwest of Germany. Transnet BV, which is the like, but actually companies that I can name I can use actually use their names, because they're so regulated that they're basically public public entities, they're not not really corporations, who we have a conversation with them about their data. And I noticed that they are very, very far from fully understanding how they manage debt with it's actually very, very low level simple algorithms that are often like 30 years behind the time. So there's actually a lot to do for people who have aI expertise, you could work on, you know, improving virtual reality to a point where people can actually have conferences, and not fly somewhere, because at the moment, to be honest, they can't. So video conferences at the moment, just suck by the digital. So we have to do something about it, this is going to last another one year or so and then everyone will have to will want to meet again in person, it's soon just doesn't work for us, you can help build better batteries by automating material science, finding complicated molecules that are good at storing energy, you could build drones that plant seeds and and, and trees, you could try and work on fusion power at Ford is not going to be the solution the next 10 years. But it's a famous controlled problem that is probably going to be solved by AI at this point. You could work on advanced simulation methods. So the University of Stuttgart, for example, has an excellent cluster only dedicated to the intersection of AI and architecture, just for building new buildings that need less cement by creating organic structures such such that you don't have to use as much as much cement anymore, or different kinds of constructions that are stable, also to change climate, right disable to high winds and flooding, using good simulation methods or actually too low level research for machine learning. So that's the end of this section of the of the lecture, I think we have to accept it, we're not going back to pre industrial times. So we have to think about how we can make the industrial parts sustainable. If you do that, we realize that different sources of energy or of co2 emissions actually have qualitatively different nature, some of them are easier to make sustainable, some of them are harder to make sustainable electricity is the easiest one to make sustainable. In fact, it's already on its way to be sustainable. Digital technology is one part of that, it says it's a part of the sector that uses electricity. So that's arguably a good thing. But that doesn't mean we are free to just use as much of it as we want. We have to make sure that consumption doesn't grow beyond what we can do by reducing its energy footprint. And we can do that actually, because AI in particular, and computer science as a whole is still not at the overall limit of its efficiency in terms of use of energy to manage information, or operate on information. If you really want to have one takeaway of what to do, then you have to maybe not switch off your fridge. I mean, you can do that still. But it's more important maybe to get governments to change their the legal framework so that everyone is forced to somehow use less produce less co2. And you particular you as individuals in this room, not the whole society you have a special skill especially superpower through your education to that you could 10 could decide to focus on technology that actually helps with sustainability. Okay, that's the end of the content lecture. And if you'd like to provide feedback on that, I hope you're going to scan this QR code, I would now like to use the last 10 minutes to do some admin work on the projects. Because not sure everyone in this room is actually taking the data literacy class, but those who are now at this point have to start thinking about their research projects. But I just want to use like a minute if someone wants to ask a question about the sustainability deck show. Us. The metabolic so the question for the people in the call is, if I say people should, virtual reality should become better at my secret the advertising for Facebook maybe right, or for meta. And so I actually am personally, I'm actually skeptical about whether virtual reality is, is able to really replace the personal experience, we have a very strong data point at the moment, or it's lots of data at the moment, due to Corona. And we have virtual conferences, and they just do not work. Like it's really, really a sad state of affairs. And, and so I'm actually skeptical, it's possible to replace physical travel, for example, for conferences. But I'm not working in computer vision. So if, you know, if you like, beat me away and put Andreas Geiger here, maybe he has a different different opinion on it. And the people who really liked graphics and computer vision, I think I'm more positive, more optimistic about what's yet to come. It's not for me to decide, personally, I would, I'm very happy to meet people in person, I'm really missing video conferences. And I think it's very difficult to make the experience that actually makes a conference important digital, because the experience is about, you know, going for dinner with people and hanging out in a crowded conference room somewhere in a corner discussing the next paper. And that's very hard to make, to put into Kabataan. Okay, so because there's limited time left, let me like, go forward to what you need to do next now. So as I mentioned, at the beginning of the of the course, in October, before Christmas, you got your last exercise sheet, you just submitted it hopefully before the lecture. So there will be no more exercise sheets for the rest of this term. Instead, there will be a group project or actually just a single project maybe as well. So what you're going to do now is and this is going to be a bit of a complicated process. And I should say at first, if the first time you do this ever, so it's going to be a little bit rocky. But I'm still really curious to see how it will turn out. So what you're going to do now is you will have to over the course of this week, find a data set, I'll provide you a link of examples on the next slide, we'll talk about them in a moment. Once you've decided and you will have to decide which data set you will work on by this Friday. And will force you to make that decision by asking you to submit a pre registration. This is often called in the in biology, for example, where you basically have to write down what you're planning to do, what your analysis is going to be. And you haven't fully decided how that's going to work. So we'll decide on Wednesday with the tutors in a meeting. And then I'll send you an email on Wednesday on how you're going to do that. But I know that we have to take the decision by Friday, and my current guess is you're probably have to provide the abstract of the report and send it somewhere. And the reason we do that is that if you don't do it, there's a big risk that people will keep jumping to different data sets for the next four weeks, and then do it in the last three days. And it's not going to be nice. So it's actually in your interest to decide by this Friday, what you're going to be working on and then just live with your data set for the rest of the term. That's also how research kind of works. Like you make a commitment to a PhD project and you're stuck with it for the next four years. Roughly. So in in your report, you're going to get then you're going to submit in four weeks. So by seventh of February, two things are good people and the report, actually the report will be indicated. And that report will consist of a roughly four page document in the new rip style. If you've seen numerous papers before you know that they have really wide margins. It's not a particularly long document. It will include references, so maybe it's just three pages of actual text. It can be less than four pages if you like, just don't make it way too short. And in that report, you describe You write an abstract, you have a title, you put your authors in like a real paper, like an abstract for a conference, extended abstract, but you write what you've done, what data set you've used, and then actually do some kind of data analysis. And here, I think you'll be pretty free. What you want to work on, I'll say more about that in a moment. And it could, it could be a statistical analysis, like you could compute some p values, you could estimate some some unknown variable, you could do some Bayesian analysis, or you could just do some visualization, maybe you make some really cool plot to show something interesting some structure of the data set, it doesn't have to be pure statistics. And you can also use whatever methodology you like, as long as you cited properly, you could of course, use stuff that we've done in the lecture, but other stuff as well. What you have to have in your, in your report is at least, at least one decent plot, probably more like three. And we'll talk about how to make nice plots in lecture 12. Actually, the next upcoming three lectures are kind of concurrent commentary by me on how I think you should be doing those projects, like how to structure your data analysis, how to make a nice plot, how to write how to on and so on. And then, of course, also cites stuff and discuss some limitations. And depending on which data set you choose, we might also ask you by Friday, once we've read what you're planning to do to include a short ethics statement, it depends on what kind of data set you use. If it's something that's had that has no ethical considerations whatsoever, then, of course not. Okay, you'll see in a moment, and I'll show you examples of why that might be interesting. Okay, so then you have to submit by seventh of February, you submit both the Git repo containing the PDF, we'll also look at the Git repo, which has to contain the code. And, and we haven't, I mean, so many of you. So obviously, we're not going to do like some closed code analysis. But we want to get you to actually think of how to structure the data analysis itself as well, not just the text. And then the project will be graded. There will not be a final presentation, you may remember that I said in October that there will be a presentation, I realized that asking you to do that would be essentially like adding a whole seminar onto this course. And that's just too much work for everyone involved. So we're just not going to find your presentations, you just submit your four page report, and we'll look at it into graded. And that's going to be 20% of the overall grade. So what kind of data could you possibly work on? Let me give you a few examples. I've listed a few. And you can download this this slide. Of course we do. Together with all the other ones on EBS. Everything that's underlined by the way also in earlier slides is always a link you can click on. So here are just some examples. And I will tell you that full disclosure how I got this data, I got those those ideas over the past 20 Or someone is asking bonus points are for the bonus points for the coding exercises are for the exam. Yes, they are for the exam, not for the project. Is it allowed to generate the data set by colleague websites? Yes, I'll get to that in a moment. So what I've done over the last half year or so is every time I came across some fun stuff on social media, or while making this lecture I gave today, I just put it on this list. I just this had I just had organically had this, this website this like grow over time. So I'm not saying those are the accurate data sets you have to use. You can find your own ones, I just want to give you an idea of what kind of stuff you could use, you could use all this complicated data about co2 footprint of Germany, that's actually really complicated. And there, you could do an analysis basically, of how they differ in like different sources differ and how they compute these impact and how much of an error bar you might get from that do some kind of meta analysis on these different sources of data, you could do the same for the agricultural thing. So a detailed data check I mentioned before, but he actually has a thing where he says cement makes 11% of the world's co2 production and agricultural makes less than 20%. So maybe my numbers are slightly off would be interesting to understand whether that's actually the case or not. You could use the results of the federal election, they are now available actually, they're not quite available yet for the for beyond the voting districts down to the to the voting, polling stations basically. But apparently, they'll come out this week or so. So if you want to use them you could use is a really nice low level analysis. Even you could do that before the journalists come out with it, right. So this week, when this data comes out, people at that site and the speaker and so on, they're all going to jump on this data and try to make nice visualizations, you can see if you can make your own one. You can use of course, any COVID data and you know that there is now an infinite amount of it. And you can use whatever, whichever one of you have that you want. One really cool example that I like is something that Dimitri Kovac researcher here in Turin at the eye hospital actually just down the road. It started very early on doing COVID To collect excess mortality data across the world and used it to point out that Russia had much higher excess mortality than they reported for their COVID defs at some after a while, first the spirit and then the economist picked him up on that. And they actually used his data to make a very nice visualization that you can now find the at don't cite him because the economist never cites their authors. But I think Dimitri was kind of at least involved with it a little bit. You can find all the speeches ever given the Bundestag annotated translated into text, you really whatever you want, right, find out that certain words become more frequent over time, or topics change or whatever. There is a data set to collect salaries of computer scientists across the world. Also, for AI and ML, really big data datasets that are collected in interesting ways. Think about whether that you could use that to figure out to help yourself or make a website to help people to salary negotiations. I don't know. There's a collection of subtitles for movies. It's a huge database, actually, where you can find whatever anyone has said at a bit with timestamps in movies and television series. And then it mentioned ethical considerations before it turns out on Kaggle, there is a database containing 200,000 illegal drug listings with price with the drug, and where it's being sold, and where it's being sold to, that you would otherwise have to do probably something semi illegal to get to. But now it's just open on the internet. So maybe there's something interesting to find in there. And what's the how does the price of certain drugs has changed over time, because if you do that, we probably expect you to write some ethics statement about why what you're doing is a good idea or not, and how you're planning to handle this result of this. There is access to music through Spotify, they also have an API, there's also a Kaggle data set that contains one and a half million songs, which is a significant part of all popular music. And there's a fun map of how long it takes by bike or train or car to get from Paris anywhere. You could do the same for tubing. And there's a complicated process for how to make that actually there's it's more of a data processing kind of question rather than a visualization question. And then there are Python API's, as many of you might know, for pretty much. All large scale sources of data, there's Google BigQuery, there's Twitter has an API, Wikipedia and archive all have API's that you can directly call from Python with a corresponding Python library so that those are fun to use as well. And then there's this subreddit for data sets. It's just full of fun ideas. So if you have your own idea of what you want to want to download and run on, of course, you're very much invited to do so in fact, it would be fun, if you did. So I'm not saying you should use those datasets. But maybe this gives a rough idea of what kind of data we're talking about. Right? So we're not asking you to do a poll of 12 people somewhere in the market square tubing and then do some fancy analysis on it. But actually use some fun real data where you actually have to spend some time to wrangle the data. Someone said, as you mentioned, you discuss some project related topics of the left lectures, it means the final written exam will be from topics discussed to the break. No, so I'll say more about the written exam in later lectures, not today. And some of the stuff we do in the next few weeks is still weekly relevant to the exam, but maybe less than the previous parts. Okay, final slide. What are we really looking for? Yeah. Ah, so you could I'm not against using so the question for people in the call is, can I use data that is not publicly available, but which I have? I think I'm okay with you using data that is not publicly available, I think, then he would expect you to talk a little bit about how you're dealing with that data? Are you going to disclose it? Why can you not disclose it? Can you make it open? If not, then why not? Is this a problem? And what kind of information about the data could you provide to us to allow us to do the evaluation? And so this is a common problem, right? For example, in all healthcare research, and people have ways of dealing with it. Okay, so I just want to say a few things. Because I, I'm sure that there are many open questions about what you're supposed to do for the next four weeks, right. So what we'll do is you'll, you'll this video, this week, you'll save which project you want to work on, and which data set you want to work on and who your partners, you could be you can be groups of two, at most to just like for the for the exercises before you can also do it alone. And then we'll probably assign each group to one tutor, and the tutor is just there, if you want, if you have like a quick question, if you want to have like some sanity question, and you can send them an email, they are not going to be closely involved with your project, if only because otherwise, it will be a little bit too much. But you can you know, interact with them a bit. If you have some simple questions you can ask them, they'll provide some feedback. It's the first time we do this. So I'm very curious to see how it will work out. And we're going to be very open minded about how we grade and how we try to understand what you've been doing. But of course, that will also create a lot of variability among you. So I, you know, I'm just looking forward to see what you do. That's why I showed you this list of datasets to give, get a give a rough, and we idea of what we're looking for. You can you don't have to just do data analysis, you don't just have to do visualization, you could do both, you could also just write about the structure of a data set and do visualizations or analysis of these datasets if they are so complicated that it's actually worth talking about. So if you, for example, think of Twitter or the archive feed on Python, then you can imagine, you know, just understanding the data set is actually already pretty interesting for Wikipedia. So graphical representations of them, and so on. But if you only do one, then of course, you're only going to be graded on that one. So make sure it's actually done well. So if you make a good visualization, make sure it's actually a cool visualization. Okay, so what is the what what are we aiming for what's the goal of all of this, we want you to understand how to better someone wrote in the evaluation, that we're doing too much coding and dispatch in this course, there's too much Python coding, and you don't like these NumPy NumPy functionality, because you think you're gonna forget about them again, right after this course, this is actually a significant part of what this course is about, it is important to know these tools, so that you're just able to work with them, I know that they are a bit random, and you could have picked some others. But it's actually useful to have this ability to come out of a course and just actually do something, this is a goal of these projects, to get you to download some data, work with it procedurally, not just open an Excel sheet and type down some numbers, but actually write a Jupyter notebook or a Python script or whatever you like to whichever way you'd like to analyze the data properly, then structure a code report. That's why we asked you to submit a Git repo as well, in a way that you can come back five years from now and still understand what you did, it's actually hard to do. We'll talk about how to do that next week, and how to deal with real world data. Because it's actually pretty hard once you use not data that has been perfectly cleaned up for you as a benchmark, but that actually comes from the real world, you'll notice when you look at those data sets, and find something interesting to say, that's actually a very hard question. And presented, make a plot for it graphically, a nice one, put it in a PDF file using Latech, that you can actually see, that's the kind of skills that you will need to write your master thesis, maybe to do a PhD or even just work somewhere after university to make to properly present what you've done. Okay, and over the next few weeks, we'll cover some of this. And I know it's a bit of a problem that will cover it while you do it, it would be nice to do it first. But that's just the way it is right? I don't want you to do too fat checks over the break. I'm sure you don't either, right. So we'll have to like go along. And maybe after one of my lectures, you'll have to go back and change some of your plots. That's just the way it is. Okay, so that's what I wanted to say. Any questions. Otherwise, you'll get an email from me probably by Wednesday afternoon about how to register your data. You can already look at those data sets and find some that you want to work on. And then you'll tell us on Friday, what you'll do over the next three weeks afterwards. Thanks. Uh huh. Which teaching were often it's a very good point. Actually, I wanted to bring this up. Maybe I'll bring it up next week. I am actually looking for tutors for the informatik three basic theory of computer science for for bachelor students, but I'll talk about that on next. Monday. If you're looking for a heavy job for next week, for next firm, that's an option. Someone's asking how do you register your team and topic by Friday will tell you in an email on Wednesday that goes out through emails to everyone how to do that. Okay, thank you all very much and goodbye. 

